Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 000–000 (0000)

Printed 22 April 2020

(MN LATEX style file v2.2)

arXiv:2001.06021v2 [astro-ph.GA] 21 Apr 2020

Reionization with galaxies and active galactic nuclei
Pratika Dayal1? , Marta Volonteri2 , Tirthankar Roy Choudhury3 ,
Raffaella Schneider4,5,6 , Maxime Trebitsch2,7,8 , Nickolay Y. Gnedin9,10,11 ,
Hakim
Atek2 , Michaela Hirschmann12 , Amy Reines13
1
Kapteyn Astronomical Institute, University of Groningen, P.O. Box 800, 9700 AV Groningen, The Netherlands

2 Institut d’Astrophysique de Paris, Sorbonne Universite, CNRS, UMR 7095, 98 bis bd Arago, 75014 Paris, France
3 National Centre for Radio Astrophysics, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Pune 411007, India
4 Dipartimento di Fisica, “Sapienza” Università di Roma, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Roma, Italy
5 INAF/Osservatorio Astronomico di Roma, Via di Frascati 33, 00040 Monte Porzio Catone, Italy
6 INFN, Sezione Roma1, Dipartimento di Fisica, “Sapienza” Università di Roma, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185, Roma, Italy
7 Max-Planck-Institut für Astronomie, Königstuhl 17, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany
8 Zentrum für Astronomie der Universität Heidelberg, Institut für Theoretische Astrophysik, Albert-Ueberle-Str. 2, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
9 Particle Astrophysics Center, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, IL 60510, USA
10 Kavli Institute for Cosmological Physics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
11 Department of Astronomy & Astrophysics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
12 DARK, Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Lyngbyvej 2, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark
13 eXtreme Gravity Institute, Department of Physics, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717, USA

ABSTRACT

In this work we investigate the properties of the sources that reionized the intergalactic medium (IGM) in the high-redshift Universe. Using a semi-analytical model
aimed at reproducing galaxies and black holes in the first ∼ 1.5 Gyr of the Universe, we
revisit the relative role of star formation and black hole accretion in producing ionizing
photons that can escape into the IGM. Both star formation and black hole accretion
are regulated by supernova feedback, resulting in black hole accretion being stunted
in low-mass halos. We explore a wide range of combinations for the escape fraction
of ionizing photons (redshift-dependent, constant and scaling with stellar mass) from
bh
sf
) to find: (i) the ionizing budget is domi) and AGN (fesc
both star formation (hfesc
inated by stellar radiation from low stellar mass (M∗ < 109 M ) galaxies at z > 6
>
with the AGN contribution (driven by Mbh > 106 M black holes in M∗ ∼
109 M
galaxies) dominating at lower redshifts; (ii) AGN only contribute 10 − 25% to the
cumulative ionizing emissivity by z = 4 for the models that match the observed reionsf
bh
ization constraints; (iii) if the stellar mass dependence of hfesc
i is shallower than fesc
,
at z < 7 a transition stellar mass exists above which AGN dominate the escaping ionizing photon production rate; (iv) the transition stellar mass decreases with decreasing
redshift. While AGN dominate the escaping emissivity above the knee of the stellar
mass function at z ∼ 6.8, they take-over at stellar masses that are a tenth of the knee
mass by z = 4.
Key words: galaxies: evolution – galaxies: high-redshift – galaxies: intergalactic
medium – galaxies: quasars – cosmology: reionization

1

?

p.dayal@rug.nl

c 0000 RAS

INTRODUCTION

The epoch of (hydrogen) reionization (EoR) begins when
the first stars start producing neutral hydrogen (H I ) ionizing photons and carving out ionized regions in the intergalactic medium (IGM). In the simplest picture, the EoR

2

Dayal et. al.

starts with the formation of the first metal-free (population
<
III; PopIII) stars at z ∼
30, with the key sources gradually
shifting to larger metal-enriched halos, powered by population II (PopII) stars and accreting black holes. However,
this picture is complicated by the fact that the progress and
sources of reionization depend on a number of (poorly constrained) parameters including the minimum halo mass of
star-forming galaxies, the star formation/black hole accretion rates, the escape fraction (fesc ) of H I ionizing photons
from the galactic environment, the impact of the reionization ultra-violet background (UVB) on the gas content of
low-mass halos and the clumping factor of the IGM (see e.g.
Dayal & Ferrara 2018).
Observationally, a number of works have used a variety
of data-sets and trends - e.g. the UV luminosity density, the
faint-end slope of the Lyman Break Galaxy (LBG) luminosity function, fesc increasing with bluer UV slopes and the
abundance and luminosity distribution of galaxies - to conclude that star formation in low-mass galaxies with an absolute magnitude MUV ' −10 to −15 alone can reionize the
IGM (Finkelstein et al. 2012; Bouwens et al. 2012; Duncan &
Conselice 2015; Robertson et al. 2015), although Naidu et al.
(2019) assume fesc ∝ the star formation rate surface den>
108 M ) galaxsity and infer that high stellar mass (M∗ ∼
ies dominate the reionization budget (see also Sharma et al.
2016). The bulk of the observational results are in agreement
with theoretical results that converge on stars in low-mass
>
<
halos (Mh ∼
109.5 M and MUV ∼
− 17) providing the bulk
>
7 (e.g. Choudhury & Ferrara
of H I ionizing photons at z ∼
2007; Salvaterra et al. 2011; Yajima et al. 2011; Wise et al.
2014; Paardekooper et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2016; Dayal et al.
2017a). A key caveat in the results, however, is that the
redshift-dependent reionization contribution from star formation in galaxies of different masses crucially depends on
the strength of UVB feedback, the trend of fesc with mass
and redshift and the evolution of the clumping factor (for
details see Sec. 7, Dayal & Ferrara 2018).
In addition, the contribution of Active Galactic Nuclei
(AGN) to reionization and its dependence on redshift and
on the host galaxy stellar mass still remain key open questions. A number of works show AGN can only have a minor reionization contribution (Yoshiura et al. 2017; Onoue
et al. 2017; Hassan et al. 2018). Contrary to these studies,
a number of results show that radiation from AGN/quasars
might contribute significantly to reionization (Volonteri &
Gnedin 2009; Madau & Haardt 2015; Mitra et al. 2015, 2018;
Grazian et al. 2018; Finkelstein et al. 2019), especially at
>
z∼
8 if ionizations by secondary electrons are accounted for,
with stars taking over as the dominant reionization sources
<
at z ∼
6 (Volonteri & Gnedin 2009). The question of the
contribution of AGN to reionization has witnessed a resurgence after recent claims of extremely high number densities
of faint AGN measured by Giallongo et al. (2015, 2019) at
>
z∼
4. While other direct searches for high-redshift AGN
have found lower number densities (Weigel et al. 2015; McGreer et al. 2018), the integrated H I ionizing emissivities
can be significantly affected by the inhomogeneous selection
and analysis of the data and by the adopted (double) power
law fits to the AGN luminosity function at different redshifts

(Kulkarni et al. 2019). Yet, if the high comoving emissivity
claimed by Giallongo et al. (2015) persists up to z ' 10,
then AGN alone could drive reionization with little/no contribution from starlight (Madau & Haardt 2015). A similar
scenario, where more than 50% of the ionizing photons are
emitted by rare and bright sources, such as quasars, has been
proposed by Chardin et al. (2015, 2017) as a possible explanation of the large fluctuations in the Lyα effective optical
depth on scales of 50 h−1 cMpc measured at the end stages of
reionization (4 < z < 6) by Becker et al. (2015). These AGNdominated or AGN-assisted models, however, are found to
reionize helium (He II ) too early (Puchwein et al. 2019) and
result in an IGM temperature evolution that is inconsistent
with the observational constraints (Becker et al. 2011).
In this work, we use a semi-analytic model (Delphi) that
has been shown to reproduce all key observables for galax>
ies and AGN at z ∼
5 to revisit the AGN contribution to
reionization, specially as a function of the host galaxy stellar mass. The key strengths of this model lie in that: (i) it is
seeded with two types of black hole seeds (stellar and direct
collapse); (ii) the black hole accretion rate is primarily regulated by the host halo mass; (iii) it uses a minimal set of
free parameters for star formation and black holes and their
associated feedback.
The
cosmological
parameters
used
in
this
work
correspond
to
Ωm , ΩΛ , Ωb , h, ns , σ8
=
0.3089, 0.6911, 0.049, 0.67, 0.96, 0.81 (Planck Collaboration et al. 2016). We quote all quantities in comoving units
unless stated otherwise and express all magnitudes in the
standard AB system (Oke & Gunn 1983).
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we detail
our code for the galaxy-BH (co)-evolution, our calculation
of fesc and the progress of reionization. The results of the
fiducial and of alternative models are presented in Sections
3 and 4. Finally, we discuss our results and present our main
conclusions in Section 6.

2

THEORETICAL MODEL

We start by introducing the galaxy formation model in Sec.
2.1 before discussing the escape fraction of ionizing radiation from galaxies and AGN in the fiducial model in Sec.
2.2. These are used to calculate the reionization history and
electron scattering optical depth in Sec. 2.3. Our fiducial
model parameters are described in Table 1.

2.1

Galaxy formation at high-z

In this work, we use the semi-analytic code Delphi (Dark
matter and the emergence of galaxies in the epoch of
reionization) that aims at simulating the assembly of the
dark matter, baryonic and black hole components of high>
redshift (z ∼
5) galaxies (Dayal et al. 2014, 2019). In brief,
starting at z = 4 we build analytic merger trees up to z = 20,
in time-steps of 20 Myrs, for 550 haloes equally separated
in log space between 108 -1013.5 M . Each halo is assigned
a number density according to the Sheth-Tormen halo mass
function (HMF) which is propagated throughout its merger
c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

Reionization with galaxies and AGN

3

Table 1. Free parameters, their symbols and values used for the fiducial model (ins1 in Dayal et al. 2019). As noted, using these
> 5 (including their UV luminosity functions,
parameter values our model reproduces all key observables for galaxies and AGN at z ∼
stellar mass/black hole mass densities, star formation rate densities, the stellar/black hole mass function) as well as the key reionization
observables (the integrated electron scattering optical depth and the redshift evolution of the ionizing photon emissivity). Simultaneously
fitting the optical depth and the emissivity constraints, we obtain f0 = 0.02 (0.0185) and β = 2.8 (2.8) if we consider the ionizing photons
provided by star formation (star formation and AGN).
Parameter

Symbol

value

Maximum star formation efficiency
Fraction of SNII energy coupling to gas
Radiative efficiency of black hole accretion
Fraction of AGN energy coupling to gas
Fraction of gas mass AGN can accrete
Fraction of Eddington rate for BH accretion
Fraction of Eddington rate for BH accretion
LW BG threshold for DCBH formation
Escape fraction of H I ionizing photons from star formation
Escape fraction of H I ionizing photons from AGN
Stellar population synthesis model
Reionization (UVB) feedback

f∗
fw
r
w
fbh
ac
fbh
fEdd (Mh < Mcrit
h )
fEdd (Mh > Mcrit
h )
α
sf i
hfesc
bh
fesc
-

0.02
0.1
0.1
0.003
5.5 × 10−4
7.5 × 10−5
1
30
f0 [(1 + z)/7]β .
Ueda et al. (2014)
Starburst99
No

tree; the resulting HMFs have been confirmed to be in accord with the Sheth-Tormen HMF at all z ∼ 5 − 20.
The very first progenitors of any galaxy are assigned
an initial gas mass as per the cosmological baryon-to-dark
matter ratio such that Mgi = (Ωb /Ωm )Mh , where Mh is
the halo mass. The effective star formation efficiency, f∗eff ,
for any halo is calculated as the minimum between the efficiency that produces enough type II supernova (SNII) energy to eject the rest of the gas, f∗ej , and an upper maximum
threshold, f∗ , so that f∗eff = min[f∗ej , f∗ ] where a fraction fw
of the SNII energy can couple to the gas. The gas mass left
after including the effects of star formation and supernova
feedback is then given by:


f∗eff
.
(1)
Mgf
∗ (z) = [Mgi (z) − M∗ (z)] 1 −
f∗ej
Our model also includes two types of black hole seeds that
can be assigned to the first progenitors of any halo. These
include (i) massive direct-collapse black hole (DCBH) seeds
with masses between Mbh = 103−4 M and, (ii) PopIII stellar black hole seeds of 150 M masses. As detailed in Dayal
et al. (2017b), we calculate the strength of the LymanWerner (LW) background irradiating each such starting
halo. Halos with a LW background strength JLW > Jcrit =
αJ21 (where J21 = 10−21 ergs−1 Hz−1 cm−2 sr−1 and α is a
free parameter) are assigned DCBH seeds while halos not
meeting this criterion are assigned the lighter PopIII seeds.
We note that, given that the number densities of DCBH
seeds are ∼ −2 (−3.8) orders of magnitude below that of
stellar seeds for α = 30 (300), the exact value of α (as well
as the DCBH seed mass) have no sensible bearing on our
results, since we only consider models that reproduce the
AGN luminosity function. In this paper we do not aim at
investigating which type of black hole seed can contribute
most to reionization, but how a population of AGN reproducing available observational constraints can contribute to
reionization.
c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

Once seeded, the black holes (as the baryonic and dark
matter components) grow in mass through mergers and accretion in successive time-steps. A fraction of the gas mass
left after star formation and SNII ejection (see Eqn. 1) can
be accreted onto the black hole. This accretion rate depends
on both the host halo mass and redshift through a critical
halo mass (Bower et al. 2017):
11.25
Mcrit
M [Ωm (1 + z)3 + Ωλ ]0.125 ,
h (z) = 10

(2)

such that the mass accreted by the black hole (of mass Mbh )
at any given time-step is:
h
i
ac
gf
Mac
(3)
bh (z) = min fEdd MEdd (z), (1 − r )fbh M∗ (z) ,
where MEdd (z) = (1 − r )[4πGMbh (z)mp ][σT r c]−1 ∆t is the
total mass that can be accreted in a time-step assuming
Eddington luminosity. Here, G is the gravitational constant,
mp is the proton mass, σT is the Thomson scattering optical
depth, r is the BH radiative efficiency, c is the speed of light
and ∆t = 20Myr is the merger tree time-step. Further, the
value of fEdd is assigned based on the critical halo mass
ac
(Eqn. 2) as detailed in Table 1 and fbh
represents a fixed
fraction of the total gas mass present in the host galaxy that
w
can be accreted by the black hole. A fixed fraction fbh
of the
total energy emitted by the accreting black hole is allowed
to couple to the gas content. The values used for each of
these parameters in our fiducial model are detailed in Table
1. Finally, reionization feedback is included by suppressing
the gas content, and hence star formation and black hole
<
accretion, of halos with a virial velocity Vvir ∼
40 km s−1 at
all redshifts, as detailed in Sec. 2.3.
In the interest of simplicity, every newly formed stellar population is assumed to follow a Salpeter initial mass
function (IMF; Salpeter 1955) with masses in the range
0.1 − 100M , with a metallicity Z = 0.05Z and an age
of 2 Myr; a lower (higher) metallicity or a younger (older)
stellar population across all galaxies would scale up (down)
the UV luminosity function which could be accommodated

4

Dayal et. al.

by varying the free-parameters for star formation (f∗eff
and fw ). Under these assumptions, the Starburst99 (SB99)
stellar population synthesis (SPS) model yields the timeevolution of the star-formation powered production rate of
H I ionizing photons (ṅsf
int ) and the UV luminosity (LUV ) to
be:


t
sf
46.6255
ṅint (t) = 10
− 3.92 log10
+ 0.7 [s−1 ], (4)
2 Myr
and

t
+0.462 [erg s−1 Å−1 ].
2 Myr
(5)
Inspired by the Shakura-Sunyaev solution (Shakura &
Sunyaev 1973), AGN are assigned a spectral energy distribution (SED) that depends on the key black hole physical
parameters, namely the black hole mass and Eddington ratio (Volonteri et al. 2017). We follow here a variant based on
the physical models developed by Done et al. (2012). Specifically, we calculate the energy of the peak of the SED as
described in Thomas et al. (2016), but adopt the default
functional form of the spectrum used in Cloudy (Ferland
et al. 2013).
Once an AGN is assigned a luminosity and a SED,
the UV luminosity is calculated as detailed in Dayal et al.
(2019). Further, we integrate above 13.6 eV to obtain the H i
ionizing luminosity and mean energy of ionizing photons (see
Fig. A1 in the Appendix). For AGN, this provides an upper limit, as photons above 24.59 eV and 54.4 eV can ionize
He i and He ii. We further include a correction for secondary
ionizations from the hard AGN photons, by taking the upper limit to their contribution, i.e., assuming fully neutral
hydrogen and that 39% of their energy goes into secondary
ionizations (Shull & van Steenberg 1985; Madau & Fragos
2017).
LUV (t) = 1033.077 −1.33 log10

2.2



funabs =

1−ψ
,
1+ψ

(6)

where ψ = ψz −0.24(Lx −43.75), ψz = 0.43[1+min(z, 2)]0.48
and Lx is the log of the intrinsic 2–10 keV X-ray luminosity
>
in erg s−1 ; given our model is for z ∼
5, this implies ψz =
0.73. We do not extrapolate the evolution beyond z = 2,
the range for which the dependence has been studied using
data. As in Ricci et al. (2017), we assume that unobscured
quasars have fesc = 1 and zero otherwise (see their section
4.1 for a discussion and alternative models and Volonteri
et al. 2017, for a discussion on the redshift evolution of the
obscured fraction).
Secondly, Merloni et al. (2014) find that X–ray and optical obscuration are not necessarily the same for AGN, although the trend of optically obscured AGN with luminosity
is consistent with the scaling we adopt. Our second model
bh
for fesc
considers the fraction of optically unobscured AGN
as a function of luminosity from Merloni et al. (2014), where
this fraction is found to be independent of redshift. It takes
the functional form:


1
43.89 − log Lx
bh
fesc
= 1 − 0.56 + arctan
,
(7)
π
0.46
where log Lx is the logarithm of the intrinsic 2–10 keV X-ray
luminosity in erg s−1 .
Thirdly, we can maximize the contribution of AGN to
bh
reionization by assuming fesc
= 1, although Micheva et al.
bh
(2017) find that even for unobscured AGN fesc
is not necessarily unity.
Finally, we explore a model wherein we use the same
(redshift-dependent) escape fraction for the ionizing radiation from both star formation and AGN. The results from
these last three cases are discussed in detail in Sec. 4.

The escape fraction of H I ionizing photons

In what follows, we discuss our calculations of fesc for both
AGN and stellar radiation from galaxies. In addition to the
fiducial model, we study five combinations of fesc from star
formation and AGN in order to explore the available parameter space and its impact on our results as detailed in Sec.
4.
2.2.1

(L2−10keV > 1046 erg s−1 ). The unobscured fraction can be
written as:

bh
The escape fraction for AGN (fesc
)

For the ionizing radiation emitted from the AGN, we consider four different models. We start by taking an approach
similar to Ricci et al. (2017) for the fiducial model. Essentially, we assume that the unobscured fraction, i.e., the
fraction of AGN with column density < 1022 cm−2 is a
bh
proxy for the escape fraction, fesc
. The argument is that
by applying a column-density dependent correction to the
X-ray LF, one recovers the UV luminosity function. As in
Dayal et al. (2019), we adopt the luminosity-dependent formalism of Ueda et al. (2014), taking as unobscured fraction funabs ≡ flogNH<22 , which varies from ' 10% for faint
AGN (L2−10keV < 1043 erg s−1 ) to ' 67% for bright AGN

2.2.2

sf
The escape fraction for star formation (hfesc
i)

Both the value of the escape fraction of H I ionizing radiasf
tion emitted from the stellar population (hfesc
i) as well as
its trend with the galaxy mass or even redshift remain extremely poorly understood (Sec. 7.1, Dayal & Ferrara 2018).
sf
We study four cases for hfesc
i in this work: firstly, in our
fiducial model, we use an escape fraction that scales down
sf
with decreasing redshift as hfesc
i = f0 [(1 + z)/7]β where
β > 1 and f0 is a constant at a given redshift. This is in accord with a number of studies (Robertson et al. 2015; Dayal
et al. 2017a; Puchwein et al. 2019) that have shown that
simultaneously reproducing the values of electron scattering
optical depth (τes ) and the redshift evolution of the emissivity require such a decrease in the global value of the escape
fraction of ionizing photons from star formation. The values
of f0 and β required to simultaneously fit the above-noted
data-sets (with and without AGN contribution) are shown
in Table 1.
Secondly, whilst maintaining the same functional form,
we find the values of the two coefficients (f0 and β) required
c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

Reionization with galaxies and AGN
to fit the optical depth and emissivity constraints using the
same escape fraction from AGN and star formation.
Thirdly, following recent results (e.g. Borthakur et al.
2014; Naidu et al. 2019), we use a model wherein the escape
fraction for star formation scales positively with the stellar mass. In this case, for galaxies that have black holes,
sf
bh
bh
we assume fesc
= fesc
using the fiducial model for fesc
;
sf
fesc = 0 for galaxies without a black hole. This accounts
for the possibility that AGN feedback enhances the effect of
SN feedback in carving “holes” in the interstellar medium,
facilitating the escape of ionizing radiation. This is a very
optimistic assumption, as dedicated simulations show that
AGN struggle to shine and amplify the escape fraction in
low-mass galaxies (Trebitsch et al. 2018).
sf
Fourthly, we explore a model with a constant hfesc
i=
0.035. Although a constant escape fraction for stellar radiation from all galaxies can reproduce the τes value, it overshoots the vale of the observed emissivity (see e.g. Fig. 3,
Dayal et al. 2017a).
sf
Finally, we explore a model wherein hfesc
i increases
with decreasing stellar mass, as has been shown by a number of theoretical works (e.g. Yajima et al. 2011; Wise
et al. 2014; Paardekooper et al. 2015). Essentially, we assf
sume hfesc
i scales with the ejected gas fraction such that
sf
sf
hfesc i = f0 (f∗eff /f∗ej ). This naturally results in a high hfesc
i
sf
value for low mass galaxies where f∗eff = f∗ej ; hfesc
i drops
with increasing mass where f∗eff ∼ f∗ < f∗ej . The results
from these last four cases are discussed in detail in Sec. 4.
sf
We clarify that while we assume the same hfesc
i value
for each galaxy, in principle, this should be thought of as
an ensemble average that depends on, and evolves with, the
underlying galaxy properties, such as mass or star formation
or a combination of both.

2.3

Modelling reionization

The reionization history, expressed through the evolution of
the volume filling fraction (QII ) for ionized hydrogen (H II ),
can be written as (Shapiro & Giroux 1987; Madau et al.
1999):
dQII
dnion 1
QII dt
=
−
,
dz
dz nH
trec dz

1
.
χ nH (1 + z)3 αB C

(9)

Here αB is the hydrogen case-B recombination coefficient,
χ = 1.08 accounts for the excess free electrons arising from
singly ionized helium and C is the IGM clumping factor. We
use a value of C that evolves with redshift as
C=

< n2HII >
= 1 + 43 z −1.71 .
< nHII >2

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

using the results of Pawlik et al. (2009) and Haardt & Madau
(2012) who show that the UVB generated by reionization
can act as an effective pressure term, reducing the clumping
factor.
While reionization is driven by the hydrogen ionizing
photons produced by stars in early galaxies, the UVB built
up during reionization suppresses the baryonic content of
galaxies by photo-heating/evaporating gas at their outskirts
(Klypin et al. 1999; Moore et al. 1999; Somerville 2002), suppressing further star formation and slowing down the reionization process. In order to account for the effect of UVB
feedback on ṅion , we assume total photo-evaporation of gas
from halos with a virial velocity below Vvir = 40 km s−1
embedded in ionized regions at any z. In this “maximal external feedback” scenario, halos below Vvir in ionized regions
neither form stars nor contribute any gas in mergers.
The globally averaged ṅion can then be expressed as:
bh
ṅion (z) = ṅsf
esc (z) + ṅesc (z)

(11)

where
ṅsf
esc (z)
ṅbh
esc (z)

=

sf
sf
hfesc
i[QII (z)ṅsf
int,II (z) + QI (z)ṅint,I (z)],

(12)

=

bh
bh
fesc
[QII (z)ṅbh
int,II (z) + QI (z)ṅint,I (z)],

(13)

sf
bh
where QI (z) = 1 − QII (z). Further, ṅsf
int,II (ṅint,II ) and ṅint,I
bh
(ṅint,I ) account for the intrinsic hydrogen ionizing photon

production rate density from star formation (black hole
accretion) in case of full UV-suppression of the gas mass
bh
and no UV suppression, respectively. The term ṅsf
esc (ṅesc )
weights these two contributions over the volume filling fraction of ionized and neutral regions - i.e. while ṅint,I represents the contribution from all sources, stars and black
holes in halos with Vvir < 40 kms−1 do not contribute to
ṅint,II . At the beginning of the reionization process, the volume filled by ionized hydrogen is very small (QII << 1) and
most galaxies are not affected by UVB-feedback, so that
bh
sf
bh
ṅion (z) ≈ ṅsf
int,I (z)hfesc i + ṅint,I (z)fesc . As QII increases and
reaches a value ' 1, all galaxies in halos with circular velocity less than Vvir = 40 km s−1 are feedback-suppressed, so
sf
bh
bh
that ṅion (z) ≈ ṅsf
int,II (z)hfesc i + ṅint,II (z)fesc .

(8)

where the first term on the right hand side is the source
term while the second term accounts for the decrease in QII
due to recombinations. Here, dnion /dz = ṅion represents
the hydrogen ionizing photon rate density contributing to
reionization. Further, nH is the comoving hydrogen number
density and trec is the recombination timescale that can be
expressed as (e.g. Madau et al. 1999):
trec =

5

(10)

3

RESULTS

Given that ṅion (z) is an output of the model, trec is calcubh
lated as a function of z and fesc
is obtained from the AGN
sf
obscuration fraction, hfesc
i is the only free parameter in our
reionization calculations. As explained above, in the fiducial
sf
model, hfesc
i is composed of two free parameters (f0 and
β) that are fit by jointly reproducing the observed values of
τes and the emissivity as discussed in Sec. 3.1 that follows.
sf
We use this hfesc
i value to study the AGN contribution to
reionization in Sec. 3.2. In order to test the robustness of
our results to assumptions, we also explore alternative models for the escape fraction from AGN and star formation and
the impact of different stellar population synthesis models
in Sec. 4.

6

Dayal et. al.

Figure 1. Redshift evolution of the H I ionizing photon emissivity (left panel) and the CMB electron scattering optical depth (τes ) as
a function of redshift (right panel) for the fiducial model. In the left panel, the open squares show observational results (and associated
error bars) calculated following the approach of Kuhlen & Faucher-Giguere (2012). In the right panel, the dot-dashed horizontal line
shows the central value for τes inferred by the latest Planck results (Planck Collaboration et al. 2018) with the gray striped region
showing the 1 − σ errors. Over-plotted are the escaping emissivities (left panel) and the optical depths (right panel) contributed by: star
sf i and
formation only (SF; dot-long-dashed line), AGN+star formation (solid line), and AGN only (short-long-dashed line) using the hfesc
bh values for the fiducial model reported in Table 1; note that hf sf i is lower in the AGN+SF case (f = 0.0185) as compared to the
fesc
0
esc
< 109 M
SF only case (f0 = 0.02). We deconstruct the contribution from star formation in galaxies into those with stellar masses M∗ ∼
> 109 M (long-dashed line) and show the contribution of black holes of masses > 106 M using the dotted
(short-dashed line) and M∗ ∼
∼
line, as marked.

3.1

The electron scattering optical depth and the
ionizing photon emissivity

We start by discussing the redshift evolution of the ionizing
photon emissivity (Eqn. 11) from the fiducial model shown
in the left panel of Fig. 1. For star formation, the “escaping”
sf
emissivity includes the effect of hfesc
i that decreases with
redshift as ∝ [(1 + z)/7]2.8 . As a result, whilst increasing
from z ∼ 19 to z ∼ 8 the emissivity from stellar sources in
galaxies thereafter shows a drop at lower redshifts. Low-mass
<
(M∗ ∼
109 M ) galaxies dominate the stellar emissivity at
all redshifts and the total (star formation+AGN) emissivity down to z ∼ 5; although sub-dominant, the importance
>
of stars in massive (M∗ ∼
109 M ) galaxies increases with
decreasing redshift and they contribute as much as 40%
(∼ 15%) to the stellar (total) emissivity at z ∼ 4.
On the other hand, driven by the growth of black holes
bh
and the constancy of fesc
with redshift, the AGN emissivity
shows a steep (six-fold) increase in the 370 Myrs between
z ∼ 6 and 4. A turning point is reached at z ∼ 5 where AGN
and star formation contribute equally to the total emissivity,
>
with the AGN contribution (dominated by Mbh ∼
106 M
9
>
black holes in M∗ ∼ 10 M galaxies) overtaking that from
star formation at lower-z. Indeed, the AGN emissivity is
almost twice of that provided by stars by z ∼ 4 leading to
an increase in the total value.
To summarise, while the trend of the total emissivity
is driven by star formation in low-mass galaxies down to
z = 5, AGN take over as the dominant contributors at lower
redshifts. This result is in agreement with synthesis models

for the UVB (Faucher-Giguère et al. 2008; Haardt & Madau
2012) as shown in the same figure.
The above trends can also be used to interpret the
latest results on the integrated electron scattering optical
depth (τes = 0.054 ± 0.007; Planck Collaboration et al.
2018), shown in the right panel of Fig. 1. We start by noting
sf
that fitting to this data requires hfesc
i = 0.02[(1 + z)/7]2.8
if stars in galaxies are considered to be the only reionization sources; as shown in Table 3 considering the contribution of both stars and AGN leads to a marginal desf
crease in the co-efficient of hfesc
i to 0.0185 whilst leaving the
redshift-relation unchanged. Stellar radiation in low-mass
<
(M∗ ∼
109 M ) galaxies dominate the contribution to τes
for most of reionization history. AGN only start making a
<
noticeable contribution at z ∼
5, where they can generate
an optical depth of τes ∼ 0.22, comparable to stars, which
generate a total value of τes ∼ 0.24. Stellar radiation from
>
high-mass (M∗ ∼
109 M ) galaxies has a sub-dominant contribution to τes at all redshifts.
3.2

AGN contribution to reionization as a
function of stellar mass

To understand the AGN contribution to reionization in the
fiducial model, we start by looking at the (intrinsic) production rate of H I ionizing photons as a function of M∗ for
z ∼ 4 − 9 (panel a; Fig. 2). As expected, ṅsf
int scales with
M∗ since higher mass galaxies typically have larger associated star formation rates. Further, given their larger gas
and black hole masses, ṅbh
int too scales with M∗ . As seen,
stars dominate the intrinsic H I ionizing radiation producc 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

Reionization with galaxies and AGN

7

Figure 2. As a function of stellar mass, the panels (top to bottom) show the results for star formation (solid lines) and AGN (light
shaded regions) for the fiducial model for: (a): the intrinsic H I ionizing photon rate; (b): the escape fraction of H I ionizing photons;
(c): the escaping H I ionizing photon rate; (d): the ratio between the escaping H I ionizing photon rate for AGN and star formation with
the horizontal line showing a ratio of unity; and (e): the transition stellar mass at which AGN start dominating the escaping ionizing
photon production rate. In this panel, the solid circles and empty triangles show the knee value of the stellar mass function (and the
associated error bars) observationally inferred by Grazian et al. (2015) and Song et al. (2016), respectively. Finally, the different colours
in panels (a)-(c) are for the redshifts marked in panel (a) while the different lines in panel (d) are for the redshifts marked in that panel.

>
tion rate for all stellar masses at z ∼
7. However, moving
to lower redshifts, black holes can contribute as much as
stars in galaxies with M∗ ∼ 1010.2−10.9 M at z ∼ 6. This
mass range decreases to M∗ ∼ 109.6−10 M at z ∼ 4 where

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

intermediate-mass galaxies host black holes that can accrete
at the Eddington rate.
The second factor that needs to be considered is the
escape fraction of ionizing photons which is shown in panel

8

Dayal et. al.

Figure 3. The ionizing photon per baryon value as a function of stellar mass for the fiducial model for star formation and AGN at z ∼ 6
and 9, as marked. The dot-dashed and solid lines show the intrinsic and escaping H I ionizing photon rates, respectively.

sf
(b) of the same figure. As noted above, hfesc
i is independent
of galaxy properties and decreases with decreasing z, going
from a value of about 5.4% at z ∼ 9 to 0.77% at z ∼ 4.
bh
However, fesc
scales with M∗ , and this is the result of
the dependence of the unabsorbed AGN fraction with luminosity: at higher AGN luminosity a higher fraction of
bh
AGN are unabsorbed. Quantitatively, while fesc
∼ 10%
<
for M∗ ∼
109.7 M , it can have a value as high as 30% for
>
1010.9 M at z ∼ 6 − 9.
M∗ ∼
We can now combine the intrinsic production rate of
H I ionizing photons and the escape fraction to look at the
rate of “escaping” ionizing radiation for star formation and
AGN in panel (c) of Fig. 2. As expected, ṅsf
esc ∝ M∗ and
bh
ṅsf
esc > ṅesc at z > 7. However at z < 7 the situation is
quite different: the most massive black holes and therefore
the most luminous AGN are hosted in massive galaxies. Additionally, the presence of a critical halo mass below which
black hole growth is suppressed (see Sec. 2.1) translates into
a critical stellar mass (Fig. 6; Dayal et al. 2019), below
bh
which only low-luminosity AGN exist and fesc
is very low.
The fact that both the intrinsic photon production from
bh
AGN and fesc
are very low in low-mass galaxies suppresses
the AGN contribution from such galaxies to the escaping
bh
photon budget. However, the fact that ṅsf
int ' ṅint for highbh
mass galaxies coupled with an increasing fesc value results in
black holes dominating the escaping ionizing radiation rate
for galaxies with mass above a “transition stellar mass” of
>
M∗ ∼
109.6 (109.2 ) M at z ∼ 6 (4).
The suppression of black hole growth in low-mass galaxies, advocated from either trying to reconcile seemingly contradictory observational results (Volonteri & Stark 2011) or
from the results of cosmological hydrodynamical simulations
(Dubois et al. 2015; Bower et al. 2017), modifies the picture

compared to early papers that assumed unimpeded growth
of massive black holes in small galaxies/halos (Volonteri &
Gnedin 2009). As noted above, the suppression of black hole
contribution from small galaxies/halos, which dominate the
mass function at the highest redshifts, is further strengthbh
ened by the assumption that fesc
increases with AGN luminosity.
The contribution of AGN to reionization was studied
using a semi-analytical model also by Qin et al. (2017). Qualitatively, our results agree with theirs, in the sense that only
relatively high-mass black holes are important thus limiting
the contribution of AGN to low redshift, and that the AGN
contribution to reionization is sub-dominant, of order 1015% at z < 6. The specific assumptions of the models differ,
though: Qin et al. (2017) assume a luminosity-independent
obscured fraction, and they do not include a spectral energy
distribution that depends on intrinsic black hole properties
(mass, accretion rate). In general, models that reproduce the
generally accepted UV luminosity functions of galaxies and
AGN will all converge to a similar fractional contribution
of AGN to reionization. The main reason for the agreement
between our results and those of Qin et al. (2017) is that
in both models black hole growth is retarded with respect
to galaxies, although in different ways. In our model suppression of black hole growth leads to a black hole mass
function with a step-like appearance, in their case it is the
overall normalization of the mass function that decreases
with increasing redshift. In principle, this can be tested observationally through measurements of the relation between
black hole and stellar masses in high redshift galaxies.
As expected from the above discussion, star formation
in galaxies dominate ṅesc for all stellar masses at z > 7 although the AGN contribution increases with M∗ as shown
c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

Reionization with galaxies and AGN
in panel (d) of Fig. 2. At z < 7, however, AGN can start
dominating ṅesc by as much as one order of magnitude for
M∗ ∼ 1011 M galaxies at z ∼ 6 where black holes can accrete at the Eddington rate. This peak mass shifts to lower
M∗ values with decreasing redshift - at z ∼ 4 AGN in galaxies with masses as low as M∗ ∼ 109.6 M , which can accrete
at the Eddington limit, dominate ṅesc by a factor of 10.
The redshift evolution of the “transition mass”, at
which AGN start dominating ṅesc , is shown in panel (e)
of the same figure which shows two key trends: firstly, as
expected, the transition mass only exists at z < 7 with stellar radiation dominating ṅesc at higher-z. Secondly, as black
holes in galaxies of increasingly lower stellar mass can accrete at the Eddington limit with decreasing redshift (Piana
et al., in prep.), the transition mass too decreases with z
from ∼ 1010.7 M at z ∼ 6.8 to ∼ 109.3 M by z ∼ 4. In the
same panel, we also show a comparison of this transition
mass to the observationally-inferred knee of the stellar mass
function (Mknee
) which ranges between 1010.5 − 1011 M at
∗
z ∼ 4 − 7. While the transition mass is comparable to the
knee stellar mass at z ∼ 6.8, it shows a very rapid decline
with decreasing redshift. Indeed, by z ∼ 4, AGN start dominating ṅesc from galaxies that are (at least) an order of
magnitude less massive compared to the knee mass and in
fact the ratio between the escaping H I ionizing photon rate
for AGN and star formation peaks at intermediate galaxy
masses. Finally, we note that such a transition mass only
sf
exists in the case that the stellar mass dependence of hfesc
i
bh
is shallower than fesc (see Section 4).
We summarise the impact of the the above-noted trends
on the production/escape rates of H I ionizing photons per
baryon over a Hubble time in Fig. 3. Here the contribution
in each galaxy mass range is weighted by its cosmic abundance, via the mass of the host halo - therefore this figure
represents the effective contribution of that mass range to
the global photon budget. We note that, at any z, while ṅsf
esc
bh
is just a scaled version of ṅsf
int , ṅesc instead evolves based on
the luminosity/mass evolution. The key trends emerging are:
firstly, at any z, whilst the contribution of stars (weighted
by the number density) is the highest at intermediate stellar
mass galaxies (107−9 M ) at z ∼ 6, the contribution is essentially mass independent between a stellar mass of 105−8 M
at z ∼ 9. Although massive galaxies, M∗ ∼ 109 − 1010 M ,
have higher production rates of ionizing radiation from both
bh
stars and black holes in addition to higher fesc
values, they
are rarer than their low-mass counterparts, which therefore
dominate the total emissivity as also shown in the left panel
of Fig. 1. Secondly, AGN only have a contribution at the high
<
stellar mass end (M∗ ∼ 109−10 M ) at z ∼
9. Thirdly, as expected from the above discussions, given both the higher
values of the intrinsic H I ionizing photon production rate
and fesc , AGN dominate the emissivity at the high-mass
>
end (M∗ ∼
109 M ) at z ∼ 6.
Since AGNs are efficient producers of HeII ionizing photons, useful constraints can be obtained on their contribution from the corresponding observations, e.g., He II Lyα optical depth at z ∼ 3 (Worseck et al. 2016) and the heating
of the IGM at z . 5 (Becker et al. 2011). A detailed modelling of the He II reionization history is beyond the scope
c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

9

of this work. However, we have computed the He III volume
filling fraction, QHeIII , and found that QHeIII ∼ 0.4 (0.2) at
z = 4 (5), assuming that the escape fraction of He II ionizing
photons is the same as that of the H I ionizing photons.
While this implies a He II reionization earlier than the model
of Haardt & Madau (2012), it is still within the 2−σ bounds
as allowed by the observations (see, e.g., Mitra et al. 2018).

4

ALTERNATIVE MODELS

Our key result is that the AGN contribution of ionizing
photons is subdominant at all galaxy masses at z > 7. At
z ∼ 6 − 7 their contribution increases with stellar mass, and
at lower redshift it is AGN in intermediate-mass galaxies
that produce most ionizing photons (Fig. 2). This results in
a “transition” stellar mass at which AGN overtake the stellar contribution to the escaping ionizing radiation; for stars
in galaxies to dominate all the way through in the mass
function, either the escape fraction of stellar radiation from
galaxies should increase with galaxy mass or that from AGN
should decrease, especially at high masses. In our fiducial
model, this transition stellar mass decreases with decreasing redshift. Further, star formation in galaxies with mass
< 109 M is the main driver of hydrogen reionization. One
could argue that this is a consequence of the steep increase
sf
of hfesc
i at high redshifts, which artificially boosts the contribution of stars in low-mass galaxies and correspondingly
reduces the contribution of AGN. In this section we examine the robustness of our results by exploring six different
bh
sf
combinations of fesc
and hfesc
i in Sec. 4.1 and two different
stellar population synthesis models in Sec. 4.2 in order to
explore the physically plausible parameter space.

4.1

Alternative models for AGN and star
formation escape fractions

sf
bh
Given that the trends of hfesc
i and fesc
with galaxy properties are still uncertain, both theoretically and observationally, Fig. 4 shows the optical depth and emissivity predicted
by the alternative models summarised in Table 2:
bh
(i) In the first model (Alt1, panels a1 and a2), fesc
is
obtained from the results of Merloni et al. (2014). We fit
to the optical depth and emissivity observations to derive
sf
hfesc
i = 0.017[(1 + z)/7]3.8 . This steep redshift-dependence
for the escaping stellar radiation from galaxies (left-most
column of Fig. 5) is required to off-set the increasing AGN
bh
<
contribution at z ∼
5 which is driven by the higher fesc
values (compared to the fiducial model) as shown in the midsf
dle column of Fig. 5. This enhances the ratio ṅbh
esc /ṅesc by
more than one order of magnitude compared to the fiducial
model at z < 7 (right-most column of Fig. 5). As seen from
the same panel, we find that the transition mass remains
almost unchanged compared to the fiducial case.
(ii) In the second model (Alt2, panels b1 and b2) we
sf
keep hfesc
i equal to the fiducial value and maximise the esbh
cape fraction from AGN by assuming fesc
= 1. Driven by
such maximal AGN contribution, this model severely over<
predicts the emissivity at z ∼
5; the optical depth, being

10

Dayal et. al.

Figure 4. The redshift evolution of the electron scattering optical depth (left column) and the associated escaping ionizing emissivity
(right column). In the left column, the dot-dashed horizontal line shows the central value for τes inferred by the latest Planck results
(Planck Collaboration et al. 2018) with the gray striped region showing the 1 − σ errors. In the right column, open squares show the
observational results (and associated error bars) calculated following the approach of Kuhlen & Faucher-Giguere (2012). In each panel,
we show results for star formation+AGN (solid line), star formation (dot-dashed line) and AGN (short-long-dashed line) for the different
alternative escape fraction models (Alt1-Alt6) discussed in Sec. 4.1 and summarised in Table 2. The model name and the fesc values
used for star formation and AGN are noted in each panel of the right column.

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

Reionization with galaxies and AGN

11

sf i (left column), f bh (middle column) and the ratio between the escaping
Figure 5. As a function of stellar mass, we show hfesc
esc
H I ionizing photon rate for AGN and stars (right column) for z ∼ 4.1 (top row) and z ∼ 6 (bottom row). We show results for the six
different alternative escape fraction models (Alt1- Alt6) discussed in Sec. 4.1 and summarised in Table 2 and also plot the fiducial model
for comparison. In the right-most column, the horizontal line shows a ratio of unity.

sf i
Table 2. For the alternative models studied in Sec. 4.1, we summarise the model name (column 1), the parameter values for hfesc
bh (column 3), the impact on the ratio ṅbh /ṅsf compared to the fiducial model (column 4) and the impact on the
(column 2) and fesc
esc
esc
transition mass at which AGN start dominating the escaping H I ionizing photon production rate compared to the fiducial model (column
5). We note that of models Alt1 - Alt6, only Alt1, Alt3 and Alt6 simultaneously fit τes (Planck Collaboration et al. 2018) and the redshift
evolution of the H I ionizing photon emissivity. We use the fiducial values of the free parameters for galaxy formation as in Table 1.

Model

sf i
hfesc

bh
fesc

sf
ṅbh
esc /ṅesc

Transition M∗

Alt1
Alt2
Alt3
Alt4
Alt5
Alt6

0.017[(1 + z)/7]3.8

Merloni et al. (2014)
1
0.017[(1 + z)/7]3.2
fiducial
Ueda et al. (2014)
fiducial

Increases at all M∗
Increases at all M∗
Decreases at all M∗
Decreases at all M∗
< 7.5
Decreases at all M∗ for z ∼
>
9.2
Increases for M∗ ∼ 10 M

Almost unchanged
Decreases by 0.2 (0.4 dex) at z ∼ 6 (4)
Increases by 0.1 dex at z ∼ 6 − 4
Decreases by 0.3 dex (unchanged) at z ∼ 6 (4)

fiducial
0.017[(1 + z)/7]3.2
bh ∝ M γ
fiducial fesc
∗
0.035
0.1(f∗eff /f∗ej ) ∝ M∗−ζ

dominated by star formation in galaxies for most of the
reionization history, can still be fit within the 1 − σ error
sf
bars. As seen from the right-most panel of Fig. 5, ṅbh
esc /ṅesc
is higher by more than one order of magnitude compared
to the fiducial model. Again, a transition stellar mass exists
at z < 7 and is only slightly lower (by about 0.2-0.4 dex)
compared to the fiducial model.
(iii) In the third model (Alt3, panels c1 and c2) we consider the same redshift-dependent escape fraction for the
ionizing radiation from both stellar radiation and AGN.
Here, simultaneously fitting to the optical depth and emissf
sivity values yields an escape fraction that evolves as hfesc
i=
c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

bh
sf
bh
fesc
= 0.017[(1 + z)/7]3.2 . The evolution of hfesc
i and fesc
can be seen from the left and middle columns of Fig. 5.
This model naturally results in a lower AGN contribution
to the escaping ionizing radiation at all masses and redshifts
as compared to the fiducial model (right most panel of the
same figure). Similar to the results of model Alt4 that follows, in this model the AGN ionizing radiation contribution
is minimised and only slightly exceeds that from galaxies at
M∗ ∼ 109.5−9.8 M by z ∼ 4, i.e. stellar radiation dominates
the ionizing budget at effectively all masses and redshifts although the AGN contribution still increases with increasing
stellar mass.

12

Dayal et. al.

Figure 6. Left panel: As a function of redshift, we show the escaping H I ionizing photon emissivity. The different lines show the
emissivity from star formation+AGN while the shaded regions (of the same lighter colour) show the contribution from AGN only. Right
panel: The reionization history, expressed through the redshift evolution of the volume filling fraction of H II . The horizontal dashed
line shows Log(QII ) = −0.301, i.e. when reionization is 50% complete. The different colours in both panels show results for the fiducial
and alternative escape fraction models (discussed in Sec. 4.1) as marked in the right panel.

(iv) In the fourth model (Alt4, panels d1 and d2) we
sf
bh
bh
assume hfesc
i = fesc
using the fiducial fesc
value from Ueda
et al. (2014) for galaxies that have a black hole; we use
sf
hfesc
i = 0 for galaxies that do not host a black hole. This
sf
bh
results in both hfesc
i and fesc
scaling positively with the stellar mass as shown in the left-most and middle panels of Fig.
5. As in the previous model, this identical escape fraction
for both stellar radiation and AGN results in stellar radiation dominating the ionizing budget at almost all masses
and redshifts; the AGN ionizing radiation contribution only
slightly exceeds that from galaxies at M∗ ∼ 1010 M by
z ∼ 4. However, we note that this model over-predicts the
emissivity from stellar sources at all redshifts and is unable
to simultaneously reproduce both the values of τes the the
emissivity.
(v) In the fifth model (Alt5, panels e1 and e2) we assf
sume a constant hfesc
i = 3.5% and use the fiducial value for
bh
fesc . As seen from the bottom panels of Fig. 4, this model
is unable to simultaneously reproduce both the values of τes
sf
and the emissivity. In this model, the value of hfesc
i is de>
<
creased (increased) at z ∼ 7.5 ( ∼ 7.5) compared to the fiducial case as shown in the left panel of Fig. 5. Compared to
sf
the fiducial model, this results in a lower value of ṅbh
esc /ṅesc
by about 0.3 (0.8 dex) at z ∼ 6 (z ∼ 4.1) and the transition
mass increases negligibly (by ∼ 0.1 dex) at z = 4 − 6.
(vi) In the sixth model (Alt6, panels f1 and f2), while we
bh
sf
use the fiducial value for fesc
, we assume that hfesc
i scales
sf
with the ejected gas fraction such that hfesc i = f0 (f∗eff /f∗ej ).
sf
This naturally results in hfesc
i decreasing with an increasing halo (and stellar) mass. A value of f0 = 0.1 is required
to simultaneously fit both the optical depth and emissivity constraints as shown in the same figure. In this model,
the increasing suppression of the star formation rate in lowmass halos due to both supernova and reionization feedback

naturally leads to a downturn in the stellar emissivity with
decreasing redshift. As shown in Fig. 5, in this model the
sf
>
108.4 M
hfesc
i values lie below the fiducial one for all M∗ ∼
sf
at z ∼ 6. However, by z ∼ 4, the hfesc i values for the lowest
mass halos (∼ 108.6 M ) approach the values for the fiducial
model. Compared to the fiducial model, this results in an insf
creasing ṅbh
esc /ṅesc with increasing stellar mass, specially for
9.2
>
M∗ ∼ 10 M . This naturally leads a transition mass that
is lower than that in the fiducial model by about 0.3 dex at
z ∼ 6, whilst being almost identical at z ∼ 4.
sf
bh
To summarise, the possible range of hfesc
i and fesc
combinations (ranging from redshift-dependent to constant to
scaling both positively and negatively with stellar mass)
have confirmed our key results: the AGN contribution of
ionizing photons is subdominant at all galaxy masses at
z > 7 and increases with stellar mass at z < 7. Additionally, we have confirmed the existence of a “transition” stellar
mass (at which AGN overtake the stellar contribution to the
escaping ionizing radiation) which decreases with decreasing redshift. Stars dominate all the way through the mass
sf
function only when the stellar mass dependence of hfesc
i is
bh
steeper than fesc
or if we assume the same fesc values for
both star formation and AGN (i.e. the Alt3 and Alt4 models); in this case, naturally, the transition mass no longer
exists.

4.2

Alternative stellar population synthesis
models

In addition to the fiducial SB99 model, we have considered two other population synthesis models: BPASS binaries (BPB; Eldridge et al. 2017) and Starburst99 including
stripped binaries (SB99+sb; Götberg et al. 2019). The time
c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

Reionization with galaxies and AGN
Table 3. The parameter values for the z-evolution of the escape
sf i = f [(1 + z)/7]β for different models constrained
fraction, hfesc
0
to simultaneously fit τes (Planck Collaboration et al. 2018) that
combines polarisation, lensing and temperature data, and the redshift evolution of the H I ionizing photon emissivity (see text).
bh and the same values of the free
We use the fiducial value for fesc
parameters for galaxy formation as in Table 1.
SPS Model

Sources

f0 × 100

β

SB99
SB99
BPB
BPB
SB99+sb
SB99+sb

SF
SF+AGN
SF
SF+AGN
SF
SF+AGN

2.0
1.85
0.46
0.43
1.7
1.6

2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8

evolution of the intrinsic ionizing and UV photons from star
formation in the BPB model can be expressed as:
47.25
ṅsf
− 2.28 log
int (t) = 10

LUV (t) = 1033.0 −1.2 log





t
2 Myr



+ 0.6 [s−1 ],

(14)


t
+0.5 [erg s−1 Å−1 ]. (15)
2 Myr

In the SB99+sb model, these quantities evolve as:


t
sf
46.7
ṅint (t) = 10
− 2.3 log
[s−1 ],
2 Myr
LUV (t) = 1033.01 − 1.3 log



t
2 Myr



(16)

+ 0.49 [erg s−1 Å−1 ]

(17)
The rest-frame UV luminosity has almost the same normalisation and time-evolution in all three models (SB99, BPB,
SB99+sb) resulting in the same UV LFs. However, as seen
from Eqns. 5, 15 and 17, the slope of the time evolution
of ṅint is much shallower in the BPB and SB99+sb models
sf
compared to the fiducial (SB99) model. We re-tune hfesc
i
for each of these models to match to the reionization data
bh
(τes and the emissivity) using the fiducial fesc
values, the
results of which are summarised in Table 3. As seen, while
sf
the slope of the redshift dependence of hfesc
i remains unchanged (β = 2.8), the normalisation (f0 ) is the lowest for
the BPB model as compared to SB99 by a factor 4.6; the
SB99 and SB99+sb models on the other hand only differ
sf
by a factor 1.17. Finally, the lower hfesc
i values compensate
for a higher intrinsic production rate to result in the same
ṅsf
esc value as a function of M∗ . These different stellar populations, therefore, have no bearing on our result regarding
the relative AGN/starlight contribution to the ionizing radiation for different galaxy stellar masses.

5

REIONIZATION HISTORY AND THE
CUMULATIVE AGN CONTRIBUTION

We start with a recap of the total (star formation+AGN)
ionizing emissivity for all the different models considered in
c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

13

this work in (the left-panel of) Fig. 6. In all models, the ionizing emissivity from star formation dominates at z > 6 and is
virtually indistinguishable for all the models (fiducial, Alt1,
sf
Alt2 and Alt3) that use a redshift dependent hfesc
i value.
The redshift evolution of the emissivity is the steepest for
sf
the Alt4 model where hfesc
i ∝ M∗ . With its constant value
sf
of hfesc
i = 0.035, model Alt5 shows the shallowest slope.
sf
Given its lower hfesc
i values for all stellar masses at highredshifts, the Alt6 model naturally shows a lower ionizing
emissivity compared to fiducial; the stellar emissivity from
the Alt6 model converges to the fiducial one by z ∼ 9 as a
sf
result of the decreasing hfesc
i values for the latter. As expected, the AGN contribution is the lowest for the model
sf
bh
Alt3 where hfesc
i = fesc
= a decreasing function of redshift
(as shown in the same panel). It then increases by a factor
of 3 from the fiducial case to the Alt1 case and reaches its
bh
maximum for the Alt2 case where fesc
= 1.
We then discuss reionization history, expressed through
the redshift evolution of the volume filling fraction of ionized
hydrogen (QII ), as shown in (the right-panel of) Fig. 6. Insf
terestingly, despite the range and trends used for hfesc
i and
bh
fesc , reionization is 50% complete in all cases in the very narrow redshift range of z ∼ 6.6 − 7.6. Further, we find an end
redshift of reionization value of zre ∼ 5−6.5 in all the models
studied here except Alt 3. In this model, the decrease in the
sf
star formation emissivity (driven by the decrease of hfesc
i)
with decreasing redshift is not compensated by an increasing AGN contribution as in the other models; as a result,
reionization does not finish even by z ∼ 4. Given that star
formation in low-mass halos is the key driver of reionization, it is not surprising to see that reionization finishes first
(zre ∼ 6.5) in the Alt4 model that has the largest value of
sf
hfesc
i. Models Alt2 and Alt5 show a similar zre ∼ 5.8 driven
by an increasing contribution from star formation and AGN,
respectively. Finally, given their lower values of the total ion<
7, reionization ends at zre ∼ 5 in the
izing emissivity at z ∼
fiducial, Alt1 and Alt6 models.
Finally, we show the AGN contribution to the cumulative ionizing emissivity as a function of redshift in Fig. 7. As
seen, AGN contribute at most 1% of the total escaping ionizing photon rate by z ∼ 4 in the Alt3 model. This increases
to ∼ 10% of the total ionizing emissivity for the fiducial and
Alt4-Alt6 cases. Compared to the fiducial case, the higher
bh
fesc
in the Alt1 case results in an AGN contribution as high
bh
as 25% by z ∼ 4. Finally, the Alt2 case (fesc
= 1) provides
the upper limit to the AGN contribution. Here, AGN contribute as much as galaxies to the cumulative emissivity by
z ∼ 4.4.
In addition to the fiducial model, only Alt1, Alt3 and
Alt6 are able to simultaneously reproduce the emissivity
and optical depth constraints. However, as seen above, the
Alt3 model does not have enough ionizing photons to finish
the process of reionization. This leaves us with three physically plausible models - the fiducial one, Alt1 and Alt6. In
these, the AGN contribution to the total emissivity is subdominant at all z; AGN contribute about 0.5 − 1% to the
cumulative ionizing emissivity by z ∼ 6 that increases to
10 − 25% by z = 4.

14

Dayal et. al.

Figure 7. The cumulative fraction of ionizing photons contributed by AGN as a function of redshift; the horizontal short-dashed line
shows the 50% contribution to the cumulative ionizing emissivity for the various models discussed in this work (see Sec. 4.1 for details),
as marked.

6

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have studied the contribution of AGN to
hydrogen reionization. Our model includes a delayed growth
of black holes in galaxies via suppression of black hole accretion in low-mass galaxies, caused by supernova feedback.
Furthermore, in our model each accreting black hole has a
spectral energy distribution that depends on the black hole
mass and accretion rate. Given that the escape fractions for
both star formation and AGN remain poorly understood, we
have explored a wide range of combinations for these (ranging from redshift-dependent to constant to scaling both positively and negatively with stellar mass). Using these models,
we find the following key results:
• The intrinsic production rate of ionizing photons for
both star formation and AGN scales positively with stellar mass with star formation dominating at all masses and
redshifts.
• Irrespective of the escape fraction values used, the AGN
contribution to the escaping ionizing photons is always subdominant at all galaxy masses at z > 7. In the case that the
sf
bh
stellar mass dependence of hfesc
i is shallower than fesc
, at
z < 7 a “transition” stellar mass exists above which AGN
dominate the escaping ionizing photon production rate. This
transition stellar mass decreases with redshift from being
equal to the knee of the stellar mass function at z ∼ 6.8 to
being an order of magnitude less than the knee by z = 4.
• Overall, the ionizing budget is dominated by stellar radiation from low-mass (M∗ < 109 M ) galaxies down to
>
z∼
6 in all models. In the fiducial model, at z = 6 AGN
and stars in M∗ > 109 M contribute equally to the ionizing budget (∼ 15% of the total). However at z < 5.5, the
AGN contribution (driven by Mbh > 106 M black holes in

>
109 M galaxies) overtakes that from star formation
M∗ ∼
in M∗ < 109 M galaxies. The contribution from star formation in high-mass (M∗ > 109 M ) galaxies is sub-dominant
at all redshifts, reaching a maximum value of 20% of the
<
total ionizing budget at z ∼
6.
• Different stellar population synthesis models (SB99,
BPB, SB99+sb) have no bearing on our result regarding
the relative AGN/starlight contribution to the ionizing radiation for different galaxy stellar masses.
• For all models that match the observed reionization
constraints (electron scattering optical depth and the ionizing emissivity) and where reionization finishes by z ∼ 5,
AGN can contribute as much as 50 − 83% of the emissivity
at z = 5. However, AGN only contribute 0.5 − 1% to the
cumulative ionizing emissivity by z ∼ 6 that increases to
10 − 25% by z = 4.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
PD acknowledges support from the European Research
Council’s starting grant ERC StG-717001 (“DELPHI”),
from the NWO grant 016.VIDI.189.162 (“ODIN”) and the
European Commission’s and University of Groningen’s COFUND Rosalind Franklin program. MV and MT acknowledge funding from the European Research Council under
the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013 Grant Agreement no. 614199, project
“BLACK”). TRC acknowledges support from the Associateship Scheme of ICTP. MV and RS acknowledge support from
the Amaldi Research Center funded by the MIUR program
“Dipartimento di Eccellenza” (CUP:B81I18001170001). MT
is supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG,
c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

Reionization with galaxies and AGN
German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence
Strategy EXC-2181/1 - 390900948 (the Heidelberg STRUCTURES Cluster of Excellence). HA is supported by the Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES). MH acknowledges
financial support from the Carlsberg Foundation via a Semper Ardens grant (CF15-0384). Finally, PD and MV thank
La Sapienza for their hospitality, where the bulk of this work
was carried out and thank D. Stark and P. Oesch for their
insightful comments.

REFERENCES
Becker G. D., Bolton J. S., Haehnelt M. G., Sargent W.
L. W., 2011, MNRAS, 410, 1096
Becker G. D., Bolton J. S., Madau P., Pettini M., RyanWeber E. V., Venemans B. P., 2015, MNRAS, 447, 3402
Borthakur S., Heckman T. M., Leitherer C., Overzier R. A.,
2014, Science, 346, 216
Bouwens R. J., Illingworth G. D., Oesch P. A., et. al., 2012,
ApJ, 752, L5
Bower R. G., Schaye J., Frenk C. S., Theuns T., Schaller
M., Crain R. A., McAlpine S., 2017, MNRAS, 465, 32
Chardin J., Haehnelt M. G., Aubert D., Puchwein E., 2015,
MNRAS, 453, 2943
Chardin J., Puchwein E., Haehnelt M. G., 2017, MNRAS,
465, 3429
Choudhury T. R., Ferrara A., 2007, MNRAS, 380, L6
Dayal P., Choudhury T. R., Bromm V., Pacucci F., 2017a,
ApJ, 836, 16
Dayal P., Choudhury T. R., Pacucci F., Bromm V., 2017b,
MNRAS, 472, 4414
Dayal P., Ferrara A., 2018, Phys. Rep., 780, 1
Dayal P., Ferrara A., Dunlop J. S., Pacucci F., 2014, MNRAS, 445, 2545
Dayal P., Rossi E. M., Shiralilou B., Piana O., Choudhury
T. R., Volonteri M., 2019, MNRAS, 486, 2336
Done C., Davis S. W., Jin C., Blaes O., Ward M., 2012,
MNRAS, 420, 1848
Dubois Y., Volonteri M., Silk J., Devriendt J., Slyz A.,
Teyssier R., 2015, MNRAS, 452, 1502
Duncan K., Conselice C. J., 2015, MNRAS, 451, 2030
Eldridge J. J., Stanway E. R., Xiao L., McClelland L. A. S.,
Taylor G., Ng M., Greis S. M. L., Bray J. C., 2017, PASA,
34, e058
Faucher-Giguère C.-A., Lidz A., Hernquist L., Zaldarriaga
M., 2008, ApJ, 688, 85
Ferland G. J. et al., 2013, Rev. Mexicana Astron. Astrofis.,
49, 137
Finkelstein S. L. et al., 2019, ApJ, 879, 36
Finkelstein S. L., Papovich C., Ryan R. E., et. al., 2012,
ApJ, 758, 93
Giallongo E., Grazian A., Fiore F., et. al., 2015, Astronomy
and Astrophysics, 578, A83
Giallongo E. et al., 2019, ApJ, 884, 19
Götberg Y., de Mink S. E., Groh J. H., Leitherer C., Norman C., 2019, A&A, 629, A134
Grazian A., Fontana A., Santini P., et. al., 2015, A&A, 575,
A96
c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

15

Grazian A. et al., 2018, A&A, 613, A44
Haardt F., Madau P., 2012, ApJ, 746, 125
Hassan S., Davé R., Mitra S., Finlator K., Ciardi B., Santos
M. G., 2018, MNRAS, 473, 227
Klypin A., Kravtsov A. V., Valenzuela O., Prada F., 1999,
ApJ, 522, 82
Kuhlen M., Faucher-Giguere C.-A., 2012, MNRAS, 423,
862
Kulkarni G., Worseck G., Hennawi J. F., 2019, MNRAS,
488, 1035
Liu C., Mutch S. J., Angel P. W., Duffy A. R., Geil P. M.,
Poole G. B., Mesinger A., Wyithe J. S. B., 2016, MNRAS,
462, 235
Madau P., Fragos T., 2017, ApJ, 840, 39
Madau P., Haardt F., 2015, ApJ, 813, L8
Madau P., Haardt F., Rees M. J., 1999, ApJ, 514, 648
McGreer I. D., Fan X., Jiang L., Cai Z., 2018, AJ, 155, 131
Merloni A. et al., 2014, MNRAS, 437, 3550
Micheva G., Iwata I., Inoue A. K., 2017, MNRAS, 465, 302
Mitra S., Choudhury T. R., Ferrara A., 2015, MNRAS, 454,
L76
Mitra S., Choudhury T. R., Ferrara A., 2018, MNRAS, 473,
1416
Moore B., Quinn T., Governato F., Stadel J., Lake G.,
1999, MNRAS, 310, 1147
Naidu R. P., Tacchella S., Mason C. A., Bose S., Oesch
P. A., Conroy C., 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1907.13130
Oke J. B., Gunn J. E., 1983, Astrophysical Journal, 266,
713
Onoue M. et al., 2017, ApJ, 847, L15
Paardekooper J.-P., Khochfar S., Dalla Vecchia C., 2015,
MNRAS, 451, 2544
Pawlik A. H., Schaye J., van Scherpenzeel E., 2009, MNRAS, 394, 1812
Planck Collaboration, Ade P. A. R., Aghanim N., Arnaud
M., et al., 2016, A&A, 594, A13
Planck Collaboration, Aghanim N., Akrami Y. e. a., 2018,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1807.06209
Puchwein E., Haardt F., Haehnelt M. G., Madau P., 2019,
MNRAS, 485, 47
Qin Y. et al., 2017, MNRAS, 472, 2009
Ricci F., Marchesi S., Shankar F., La Franca F., Civano F.,
2017, MNRAS, 465, 1915
Robertson B. E., Ellis R. S., Furlanetto S. R., Dunlop J. S.,
2015, ApJ, 802, L19
Salpeter E. E., 1955, ApJ, 121, 161
Salvaterra R., Ferrara A., Dayal P., 2011, MNRAS, 414,
847
Shakura N. I., Sunyaev R. A., 1973, A&A, 24, 337
Shapiro P. R., Giroux M. L., 1987, ApJ, 321, L107
Sharma M., Theuns T., Frenk C., Bower R., Crain R.,
Schaller M., Schaye J., 2016, MNRAS, 458, L94
Shull J. M., van Steenberg M. E., 1985, ApJ, 298, 268
Somerville R. S., 2002, ApJ, 572, L23
Song M., Finkelstein S. L., Ashby M. L. N., et. al., 2016,
ApJ, 825, 5
Thomas A. D., Groves B. A., Sutherland R. S., Dopita
M. A., Kewley L. J., Jin C., 2016, ApJ, 833, 266

16

Dayal et. al.

Trebitsch M., Volonteri M., Dubois Y., Madau P., 2018,
MNRAS, 478, 5607
Ueda Y., Akiyama M., Hasinger G., Miyaji T., Watson
M. G., 2014, ApJ, 786, 104
Volonteri M., Gnedin N. Y., 2009, ApJ, 703, 2113
Volonteri M., Reines A. E., Atek H., Stark D. P., Trebitsch
M., 2017, ApJ, 849, 155
Volonteri M., Stark D. P., 2011, MNRAS, 417, 2085
Weigel A. K., Schawinski K., Treister E., Urry C. M., Koss
M., Trakhtenbrot B., 2015, MNRAS, 448, 3167
Wise J. H., Demchenko V. G., Halicek M. T., Norman
M. L., Turk M. J., Abel T., Smith B. D., 2014, MNRAS,
442, 2560
Worseck G., Prochaska J. X., Hennawi J. F., McQuinn M.,
2016, ApJ, 825, 144
Yajima H., Choi J.-H., Nagamine K., 2011, MNRAS, 412,
411
Yoshiura S., Hasegawa K., Ichiki K., Tashiro H.,
Shimabukuro H., Takahashi K., 2017, MNRAS, 471, 3713

APPENDIX A: IONIZING PROPERTIES AS A
FUNCTION OF BLACK HOLE PROPERTIES

Figure A1. As a function of black hole mass, the panels (top
to bottom) show the fraction of luminosity emitted in photons
above 13.6 eV and the mean energy of such photons, the fraction
of luminosity emitted in photons above 54.4 eV and the mean
energy of such photons. Solid: for a black hole at the Eddington
luminosity; dashed: for a black hole at 10% of the Eddington
luminosity; dot-dashed: for a black hole at 1% of the Eddington
luminosity.

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

