Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 000–000 (0000)

Printed 13 September 2018

(MN LATEX style file v2.2)

Secondary ionization and heating by fast electrons
Steven R. Furlanetto1,2⋆ & Samuel Johnson Stoever1,3

1 Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of California Los Angeles; Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA

2 NASA Lunar Science Institute, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA

arXiv:0910.4410v1 [astro-ph.CO] 23 Oct 2009

3 Department of Astronomy, Cornell University, 610 Space Sciences Building, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853

13 September 2018

ABSTRACT

We examine the fate of fast electrons (with energies E > 10 eV) in a thermal gas of primordial composition. To follow their interactions with the background gas, we construct a Monte
Carlo model that includes: (1) electron-electron scattering (which transforms the electron kinetic energy into heat), (2) collisional ionization of hydrogen and helium (which produces
secondary electrons that themselves scatter through the medium), and (3) collisional excitation (which produces secondary photons, whose fates we also follow approximately). For
the last process, we explicitly include all transitions to upper levels n ≤ 4, together with
a well-motivated extrapolation to higher levels. In all cases, we use recent calculated crosssections at E < 1 keV and the Bethe approximation to extrapolate to higher energies. We
compute the fractions of energy deposited as heat, ionization (tracking HI and the helium
species separately), and excitation (tracking HI Lyα separately) under a broad range of conditions appropriate to the intergalactic medium. The energy deposition fractions depend on
both the background ionized fraction and the electron energy but are nearly independent of
the background density. We find good agreement with some, but not all, previous calculations
at high energies. Electronic tables of our results are available on request.
Key words: atomic processes – intergalactic medium – diffuse radiation

1 INTRODUCTION
Fast electrons, typically generated by high-energy photons or cosmic ray collisions, are crucial for a wide range of astrophysical
problems. For example, cosmic ray ionization is important for the
thermal balance of interstellar clouds (Spitzer & Scott 1969), electrons produced by the Comptonization of γ-ray photons affect the
early history of supernova remnants (Xu et al. 1991), and broadline emission regions around quasars are likely ionized by hard
photons from those sources, making the fate of the liberated electrons of paramount importance (Shull & van Steenberg 1985).
As such, there have been numerous studies of the interactions between these electrons and a background gas, through
the processes of collisional excitation, ionization, and electronelectron scattering. These calculations have included both analytic
approaches (Spitzer & Tomasko 1968; Spitzer & Scott 1969; Jura
1971; Bergeron & Collin-Souffrin 1973; Xu & McCray 1991) and
numerical explorations (Habing & Goldsmith 1971; Shull 1979;
Shull & van Steenberg 1985; Valdés & Ferrara 2008). Most have
focused on interactions with atomic or ionic gases, relevant especially to low-density material in the interstellar (or intergalactic)
media. Others have considered the additional effects of molecules
(e.g., Dalgarno et al. 1999).
Recently, the fate of X-rays in the high-redshift intergalac⋆

Email: sfurlane@astro.ucla.edu

c 0000 RAS

tic medium (IGM) has become an important question. Before the
reionization of HI, ultraviolet ionizing photons are trapped near
their sources, but X-rays can travel much larger distances through
the IGM. As such, they are thought to provide the most important
radiation background for the bulk of the IGM, slowly ionizing the
mostly neutral gas far from stars. However, most of their energy is
deposited indirectly, through the fast electrons generated by photoionization. For example, the electrons produced by X-rays from the
first hard sources (quasars, supernova remnants, or even Population III stars; Oh 2001; Venkatesan et al. 2001) are most likely responsible for heating the IGM to T ∼ 1000 K before reionization
(Kuhlen & Madau 2005; Furlanetto 2006).
This heating and ionization could influence future generations of structure (e.g., Ricotti et al. 2002; Oh & Haiman 2003)
and it has important observational consequences. For example,
it can dramatically change the highly-redshifted 21 cm signal
from the early IGM (Furlanetto et al. 2006; Kuhlen et al. 2006;
Pritchard & Furlanetto 2007), and it could even provide a signature of exotic physics during the Dark Ages before the first
sources appear (Chen & Kamionkowski 2004; Furlanetto et al.
2006; Mapelli et al. 2006; Valdés & Ferrara 2008). Moreover,
HI Lyα photons produced as the secondary electrons collisionally excite atoms in the background gas can greatly affect the 21 cm signal by changing the hyperfine level populations of HI (Chuzhoy et al. 2006; Pritchard & Furlanetto 2007;
Chen & Miralda-Escudé 2008), and the secondary ionizations may

2

S. R. Furlanetto & S. Johnson Stoever

play an important role in the HI (and HeI) reionization of the IGM
(Ricotti & Ostriker 2004; Ricotti et al. 2005; Volonteri & Gnedin
2009).
Here we revisit this problem using a Monte Carlo model (described in §2) that incorporates the most recent cross-sections for
interactions between X-rays and primordial gas. We review the relevant physics of collisional ionization, excitation, and electron scattering in §3-5 and comment on some of our approximations in §6.
We present our principal results, together with a comparison to previous work, in §7 and a simple example of their utility for heating
of the high-redshift IGM in §8. Finally, we conclude in §9.

2 THE MONTE CARLO MODEL
Because of the wide range of interactions available to fast electrons, we use a Monte Carlo model to track their fates. Our procedure is very similar to Shull & van Steenberg (1985) (see also
Shull 1979 and Valdés & Ferrara 2008), except that we use updated
cross-sections and include (and track) more interaction processes.
An alternative, fully analytic, approach uses the degradation equation (Spencer & Fano 1954; Xu & McCray 1991), but we find that
to be more cumbersome.
As inputs, the model requires only the number densities and
ionized fractions of hydrogen and helium. We will see that the ionized fractions have an important effect on the results but that the
absolute number densities have only a slight impact (through the
Coulomb logarithm). For simplicity, we will typically assume that
the HI and HeI fractions are identical (xi ) and that the HeII fraction
is 1 − xi . The presence of HeIII does not significantly affect our results. As a fiducial value, we use the mean density of the Universe
at z = 10 (according to the cosmological parameters recommended
8
−3
by Dunkley et al. 2009), but taking any density n <
∼ 10 cm only
changes our reported values by a few percent. Note that our model
assumes a static IGM and does not self-consistently account for the
ionization (and heating) produced by each electron.
The model begins with a single electron of energy E >
10.2 eV; lower energy particles can only interact with the electron gas and so automatically deposit all of their energy as heat.
Our goal is to compute the fraction of this energy that is deposited
in ionizing each of the relevant IGM species (HI, HeI, or HeII),
the fraction of energy that is lost to collisional excitations producing photons with E < 13.6 eV (and additionally the fraction that
ends up in HI Lyα photons), and the fraction of energy that is deposited as heat in the IGM. We also follow collisional excitations
that produce higher energy photons (from helium), but the resulting photons are re-absorbed by the IGM and so are not the ultimate
products of the process.
To this end, we compute the cross-sections (weighted by the
number densities of each species) for the electron to interact with
the IGM in several different ways: collisional ionization (of any
of the three species above), collisional excitation (again of any of
the three species, and including explicitly all levels n ≤ 4), and
electron-electron collisions. Below we describe our treatment of
each of these processes in detail. From these cross-sections we randomly choose one such process for the electron to undergo and
update its energy, and the energy deposition fractions, accordingly.
If it ionizes an atom or ion, we add a new secondary electron of the
appropriate energy to the array of particles; if it collisionally excites

helium, we add a new photon to the array.1 We repeat this process
until the primary electron’s energy falls below 10.2 eV; beyond that
point, the only available process is a collision with an electron, so
we assign all its energy to heat.
We then track each of the secondary electrons through the
same machinery, and finally we randomly determine (from the
photoionization cross-sections weighted by number density) the
species that each secondary photon ionizes and follow the resulting electrons through their entire energy loss cascade. At each step,
we track the energy lost to each of the aforementioned processes.
For our final results, we follow 105 input electrons at each of
258 energies (logarithmically spaced from 10 eV to 9900 eV) at
each of fourteen ionized fractions from xi = 10−4 to 0.999. This
encompasses the range expected in the early IGM (where xi is set
by the relic density following recombination; Seager et al. 1999) up
to the point at which the neutrals are no longer significant energy
sinks.
To generate random numbers, we use the Mersenne
Twister algorithm, which has a period of at least 219937 − 1
(Matsumoto & Nishimura 1998).

3 COLLISIONAL IONIZATION
For E < 1 keV, we take the collisional ionization cross-sections
from the CCC database,2 an online collection of cross-sections
calculated with the convergent close-coupling (CCC) method. The
CCC approach is accurate whenever the target particle can be wellmodelled by one or two valence electrons above a Hartree-Fock
core; obviously this is an excellent approximation for hydrogen and
helium. The relevant physics, and references to many of the original papers for hydrogen and helium, can be found in Bray et al.
(2002). We use cubic splines to interpolate the database values.
At higher energies, we assume that cross-sections follow the
Bethe approximation limit (Bethe 1930). Then the cross-section for
ionization from the ground state in species i is
σi ∼

2Ei
E



Ai ln

E
+ Bi πa20 ,
2Ei



(1)

where a0 is the Bohr radius and Ai and Bi are coefficients. These
are usually fixed by demanding that the cross-section map onto the
first Born approximation at high energies. This asymptotic behavior
compares well to the calculated behavior at E ∼ 1 keV, and we extrapolate to higher energies by fitting a function of this form to the
uppermost energy bin in the CCC results. The resulting parameters
AH and BH differ from the analytic estimates of Johnson (1972)
by ∼ 15% and 30%, respectively, but their exact values make little difference to our final results (largely because it is the relative
importance of each ionization and excitation process that matters).
Whenever a species is collisionally ionized, it also produces a
secondary electron, so we must select the final energies of the incident and ejected electrons. We use the probability distributions of
Dalgarno et al. (1999), which are adapted from the measurements
of Opal et al. (1971); see also Shull (1979) for a discussion of the
energy spectra of secondaries. This prescription assumes that the
probability for the secondary to have an energy ε is proportional to
p(ε) ∝

1
,
1 + (ε/ε̄i )2.1

(2)

1 Collisional excitation of hydrogen produces a photon with E < 13.6 eV
that no longer affects the IGM.
2 See http://atom.curtin.edu.au/CCC-WWW/.

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

Secondary ionization and heating by fast electrons
where ε̄i = 8, 15.8, and 32.6 eV for HI, HeI, and HeII, respectively. (We always identify the “secondary” as having the lower
energy of the two final photons, so that ε < (E − Ei )/2.) Note
that secondary electrons are typically ejected with a modest energy somewhat below the ionization threshold of their original host
atom: the median energies are 7.2, 14.2, and 28.5 eV for the three
species, although there is a tail to much higher ε. As discussed in
Shull (1979), the mean secondary energy increases logarithmically
with the incident energy for fast collisions.3
Johnson (1972) provides an alternate estimate of the secondary electron energy distribution for HI by constructing analytic
approximations to the HI ionization and excitation cross-sections.
In his calculation, the leading order behavior is ∝ (1 + E/Ei )−2 ,
although he also includes several other corrective terms proportional to higher powers of this same factor (see also Omidvar 1969).
This has a similar (though not identical) shape to our choice, and
there is no simple way to extend it to the other relevant ions.

4 COLLISIONAL EXCITATION
We include collisional excitation processes in a similar way to collisional ionization, by making use of the CCC database. This provides cross-sections for all excitations from the n = 1 to n = 2, 3,
and 4 states of HI, HeI, and HeII, including separately all angular
momentum sublevels as well as separate estimates for the singlet
and triplet configurations in the case of HeI. We again extrapolate
to E > 1 keV using the Bethe approximation.
This explicit separation is useful to us because some applications (particularly estimates of the high-redshift 21 cm signal) require the production rate of HI Lyα photons through collisional excitation. For the n < 4 levels, this is relatively easy
(see Pritchard & Furlanetto 2006 and Hirata 2006 for discussions
of analogous photo-excitation processes).4 Atoms excited to the 2s
state obviously produce no Lyα photons. Atoms excited to the 3s or
3d levels must either decay through the 2p state (producing a Lyα
photon) or directly to the ground state. But in the latter case the
resulting line photon will quickly be re-absorbed by a nearby atom
(assuming that neutrals are encountered before the photon redshifts
out of resonance), and it will eventually cascade into a Lyα photon.
On the other hand, atoms excited to the 3p state must decay to 2s
and then to the ground state via two-photon decay. Thus they do
not produce Lyα photons at all.
The cascade possibilities become more complicated at n = 4.
For example, excitation to 4s can result in decay directly to the
ground state (which is irrelevant for our purposes, since the photon is re-absorbed) or indirectly through the 3p state (in which case
no Lyα photon is produced) or the 2p state (which produces a Lyα
photon). The relative fractions of these are given by the decay probabilities,
pLyα (4s) =

Ae4s−2p
,
e
A4s−2p + Ae4s−3p

(3)

where Aenm is the spontaneous emission coefficient from level n to
m. Similar exercises yield the decay probabilities for the other n =
4 sublevels. It is important to include excitations to the different
n ≥ 2 angular momentum sublevels separately, because they feed
3 Note that the exponent of 2.1 and coefficients ε in equation (2) differ
i
slightly from the fits of Shull (1979).
4 Note that the discussion below ignores the possibility of collisional deexcitation and so will break down in sufficiently dense gas.

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

3

into Lyα differently; most previous work has included only n ≤ 2
(e.g., Shull & van Steenberg 1985), averaged over all the sublevels
(e.g., Xu & McCray 1991), or included only excitation to the np
sublevels (e.g., Valdés & Ferrara 2008).
Note that, in the case of HeI and HeII excitations, the decay
photons can ionize other elements. In detail, we should follow the
radiative cascades of these excited atoms or ions, propagate each
decay photon through the IGM, and follow the resulting ionizations. However, we take a cruder approach and simply assume that
each excited atom or ion immediately decays to the ground state,
producing a photon equal to the energy of the excitation. We then
assume that this photon ionizes another atom and follow the resulting photo-electron. We use the photoionization cross-sections from
Verner et al. (1996) for this purpose.
We therefore eventually recycle all the HeI and HeII excitation
energy into ionization or heating, rather than allowing a fraction to
escape. However, we find that <
∼ 1.5% of the initial electron energy
is typically lost to HeI excitation (and even smaller than that for
HeII) in the high energy limit, and most of that is direct excitation
to 2p, for which our assumption is accurate. This approximation
is therefore a small correction to our results (comparable to many
other processes that we ignore, and smaller than uncertainties in
our cross-sections). It will, however, affect the results more strongly
near the HeI threshold (e.g., Fig. 1 of Shull & van Steenberg 1985).

4.1 Excitation to n > 4 states
The CCC database does not include cross-sections for transitions
to n > 4 states, and in any case it is impractical to include arbitrarily many final states. We therefore approximate the effects of
higher levels based on the analytic calculations of Johnson (1972)
and Xu & McCray (1991).
In the Bethe approximation, the leading coefficient An (for
excitation from the ground state to the nth level) is proportional to
the oscillator strength of the equivalent radiative absorption transition, fn . This depends on the quantum number of the upper level
through fn ∝ gn /(nkn )3 , where kn = 1 − (1/n)2 and gn is a
correction factor (the “Gaunt factor”) that depends on the quantum
mechanical details of the interaction. Thus we can approximate the
total cross-section to all levels above n = 4, relative to that for
n = 4, as
∞

X
σn≥5
(kn n)−3 ≈ 1.58.
= 60
σn=4

(4)

n=5

Because of the details that we have ignored (namely the
Gaunt factor), the actual cross-section of the higher levels is somewhat smaller than this estimate. Xu & McCray (1991) explicitly included all n ≤ 10 in their calculation (utilizing the analytic approximate cross-section of Johnson 1972); they found that the n = 5–
10 states increased the interaction rate by a factor of 1.17, as opposed to the 1.29 suggested by truncating the sum in equation (4)
at n = 10. We therefore increase the n = 4 cross-sections by a
factor (1.17/1.29) × 1.58 = 1.43 for a fiducial estimate of the
importance of higher-level transitions. Fortunately, varying this enhancement level by a factor of two affects our heating, ionization,
and excitation fractions by less than a percent.
We further assume that the fraction of such excitations producing Lyα photons is identical to that for n = 4, which is a reasonable
estimate (Pritchard & Furlanetto 2006) but does not substantially
affect our results anyway.
We also apply this same n > 4 enhancement to HeI and HeII,

4

S. R. Furlanetto & S. Johnson Stoever

although this is no more than a guess. Again, this makes only a
negligible difference to our results.

5 ELECTRON-ELECTRON COLLISIONS AND
HEATING
A fast electron will share its kinetic energy with its surroundings by scattering off of ambient electrons. The energy loss rate
is (Spitzer & Scott 1969)
4πe4 ne ln Λ
dE
=−
,
dt
me w

(5)

where ln Λ is the Coulomb logarithm (to be discussed in §6.3 below) and w is the velocity of the electron. However, this nearcontinuous slowing-down (thanks to the long-range interactions of
the Coulomb force) must be discretized to be included in our Monte
Carlo formalism.
We follow Habing & Goldsmith (1971) and Shull (1979) by
casting this process in the following form. First, we assume that
the electron loses a fixed fraction f of its energy in each interaction.
We then rewrite the energy loss rate as
dE
fE
≈
= f E × wne σee ,
dt
tcoll

(6)

where the collision time is tcoll = 1/(wne σee ) and we have let
the interaction cross-section be σee . Rearranging, and taking the
non-relativistic limit E = mw2 /2, we obtain
4

σee =

40πe
ln Λ
E2



0.05
f



.

(7)

Although the parameter f is artificial, it does not affect our
calculations: all models with f < 0.05 yield identical results,
within the errors expected in our Monte Carlo simulations.

where we have used the Coulomb logarithm appropriate to the IGM
−3
at z = 10. Clearly, even with an ionized fraction xi >
∼ 10 , this
timescale is only a small fraction of the Hubble time, so the primary
photoelectron will rapidly lose its energy once it is created.
At smaller ionized fractions, electron scattering may be slow.
However, with the Bethe approximation form for the collisional
ionization cross-section, and assuming that ∆E ∼ EH in each
interaction, the energy loss timescale from ionization is
E 3/2 1 + z −3
yr,
(9)
keV
10
where xH = 1−xi and we have evaluated the logarithmic factor at
E = 1 keV as well. The two processes are comparable when xi ∼
5
0.01. Thus tloss <
∼ 5 × 10 yr for keV photons: much smaller than
the Hubble time, so our instantaneous approximation is reasonable.
The only exceptions are very high energy electrons (which result
only from high energy X-rays, to which the Universe is transparent
anyway).
Of course, if the underlying ionization fraction changes
rapidly even this timescale may not be short enough. While such
changes are unlikely to occur faster than the Hubble time on a
global scale, the ionized fraction can certainly change rapidly on
a local level when a bright source ionizes its environs. We therefore urge caution in using our results under such circumstances.

tloss,H ∼ 5 × 105 x−1
H









6.2 Inverse Compton scattering
We have also ignored energy losses due to inverse Compton scattering from CMB photons. The emitted power due to this process
is dE/dt = −(4/3)σT cUrad γ 2 β 2 , where σT is the Thomson
4
cross-section, Urad = aTCMB
is the energy density of the CMB,
2
β = w/c, and γ = 1/(1 − β 2 ) (Rybicki & Lightman 1979). For a
non-relativistic electron, the timescale for inverse Compton cooling
is therefore


3me c
1 + z −4
8
tcomp =
≈
10
yr.
(10)
4
8σT aTCMB
10

Before proceeding to our results, we now discuss a few subtleties that arise in the calculation. In addition to the processes
that we discuss in detail below, our model also ignores several
subdominant mechanisms that have been studied before; we list
them here for completeness. First, we ignore the double ionization of neutral helium, which occurs at a rate ∼ 2% that of single ionization (Dalgarno et al. 1999). We also ignore Coulomb collisions with protons and recombinations. Valdés & Ferrara (2008)
included these two latter processes and showed that they are negligible.

Note that this is independent of energy, so inverse Compton cooling
is most important for high-energy electrons, where the other loss
timescales are large.
Because tcomp is typically much longer than the loss timescale
due to collisional processes (which is bounded from above by eqs. 8
and 9), and because of the strong redshift dependence, we have
ignored inverse Compton scattering in our calculations. It can be
roughly included by assuming that a fraction tloss /tcomp of the
electron energy is lost to the CMB and reducing the other fractions accordingly (note that their proportions will not change significantly, unless xi ≪ 10−2 and the energy is near a line threshold).

6.1 Timescales

6.3 The IGM density and temperature

Our model assumes that all of the photon’s energy is deposited in
the IGM instantaneously. In situations where that energy deposition occurs over a long time period, this may not be a good approximation (for example, if the density field or ionized fraction evolve
rapidly compared to the energy deposition timescale). We can estimate the relevant timescales by considering electron-electron interactions and collisional ionization of HI, which are typically the
most important processes. For the former, we find that

In all of our calculations, we assume that the background gas has
a density equal to the cosmic mean at z = 10. But, to a good
approximation, our results are independent of the absolute density,
because the interaction rates all scale linearly with it. However, the
Coulomb logarithm in equation (7) does have an implicit density
dependence that breaks this convenient feature. If one considers
only the scattering of the photoelectron from discrete particles, the
appropriate Coulomb logarithm is (Spitzer 1962)

6 APPROXIMATIONS

tloss,e =

E
∼ 5 × 103 x−1
i
dE/dt



E
keV

3/2 

1+z
10

−3

yr, (8)

ln Λ =

r

(kT )3
,
πne e6 γe

(11)
c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

Secondary ionization and heating by fast electrons

5

where ne is the electron density, T is the gas temperature, and ln γe
is Euler’s constant. In this regime, this factor is independent of the
electron’s energy, so σee ∝ E −2 and heating rapidly becomes less
important at high energies compared to ionization and excitation.
However, the photoelectron can also have collective interactions with the plasma as a whole. This process becomes more important at high energies. The effective Coulomb logarithm, including both individual collisions and these collective interactions, is
(Schunk & Hays 1971)

"

2E
ln Λ = ln
h̄



4πne e2
me

−1/2 #

≡ ln



4E
ζe



.

(12)

so long as E > me4 /2h̄2 ≈ 13.7 eV.5 Here, the factor ζe =
7.40 × 10−11 (ne /cm−3 ) eV. In this case, σee ∝ E −2 ln E, so
heating is somewhat more important at high energies, although σee
still falls off by one power of energy faster than the ionization and
excitation cross-sections. Note that, when plasma effects are included, the cross-section is independent of the temperature of the
gas, so we need not specify it in our calculations.
We use equation (12) in our fiducial calculations, following
Xu & McCray (1991). Ignoring collective effects reduces the fraction of incident energy deposited as heat at E >
∼ 100 eV by a few
percent, and it correspondingly increases the fractions of energy
deposited in ionization and excitation.
The density can also play a second role in collisional deexcitation of the target atoms and in populating the upper levels of
the atoms (provided also that the temperature is sufficiently large).
This requires n ≫ 108 cm−3 so is not important for the IGM.
But we caution readers against trusting our results in such environments.

7 RESULTS
We now present our main results. As a reminder, we use 105
Monte Carlo trials for each electron energy (which ranges from
10–9900 eV), and we explicitly follow all secondary electrons and
photons. We take f = 0.05 and set the density of the background
gas to be the mean cosmic density at z = 10, but we saw above
that the results are very insensitive to these parameters. The primary input parameters are then the initial electron energy and the
ionization fractions. For the latter, we let xi be the density of HII
relative to the total hydrogen density and assume that this is also
the fraction of helium in the form of HeII, with zero HeIII.
We present our results in terms of energy deposition fractions,
with fion , fheat , and fexcite the fractions of the initial electron energy that goes into ionization, heating, and HI line photons generated by collisional excitation.6 (Note that line photons from helium
are transformed into ionizing photons and so deposit their energy in
other ways, implicit in our code.) We also let fLyα be the fraction
of energy deposited in HI Lyα photons. We have verified explicitly
that our code conserves energy throughout the entire interaction cycle.
Figure 1 shows these fractions, as a function of photon energy,
in a medium with xi = 0.01. The thick solid, dashed, and dotted
5

We are interested in slightly lower energies as well, but the dynamics
there are almost completely dominated by the structure of the line spectrum
of HI rather than the details of σee .
6 We caution the reader that our parameters do not include the effects of
the initial ionization event that generates the electron.
c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

Figure 1. Energy deposition fractions as a function of initial electron energy, for an IGM with xi = 0.01. The thick solid curve shows the fraction
of energy used in ionization; the thin solid and dot-dashed curves show the
fractions used for ionizing HI and HeI, respectively. The thick dashed curve
shows the fraction deposited as heat through electron-electron interactions.
The thick dotted curve shows the total energy lost to HI line photons; the
thin dotted curve shows the fraction in HI Lyα photons.

curves show fion , fheat , and fexcite , respectively. The thin solid
and dot-dashed curves show explicitly the fractions of energy going
into HI and HeI ionization, respectively. (The fraction going into
HeII ionization is ≪ 1% throughout.) Finally, the thin dotted curve
shows fLyα .
The structure of the curves is relatively easy to understand.
Electrons with E < 10.2 eV are unable to interact with any atoms
or ions, so all of the energy is deposited as heat. As E increases,
more and more excitation and ionization processes become available, so the energy injected as heat decreases. Interestingly, even
with this large of a neutral fraction, the individual line thresholds
do not introduce discrete features into the deposition fractions, and
all of the parameters depend smoothly on energy.
At higher energies, where no additional processes become
available, the fractions vary only slowly, eventually approaching
reasonably constant values at E ∼ 1–10 keV, where ionization, heating, and excitation split roughly equally. As pointed out
by Shull & van Steenberg (1985), the naive expectation from the
Bethe approximation (with σi,e ∝ E −1 ln E for ionization and excitation and σee ∝ E −2 ln E for heating), that less and less heating
should occur at high photon energies, is false. This is because each
ionization produces a moderate energy secondary electron (typically ∼ 10 eV, but occasionally much larger). A large fraction of
the primary’s energy is lost through these intermediaries, who in
turn lose most of their energy to heat, making the behavior at high
energies much less variable than one would expect.
Figures 2 and 3 show the energy deposition fractions for a
range of xi . The first panel shows fion . For small xi , the ionization
thresholds imprint features on the curves. At high energies, fion ∼
0.4 at small ionized fractions and rapidly approaches zero as xi
increases. The behavior at very high energies sets an upper limit to
the total energy invested in ionization.

6

S. R. Furlanetto & S. Johnson Stoever

Figure 2. Energy deposition fractions in ionization (left) and heating (right) as a function of initial electron energy. The curves show results for several different
IGM ionized fractions, as labelled in the left panel.

Figure 3. Energy deposition fractions in collisional excitation (left) as a function of initial electron energy, and the fraction of this energy that goes into HI
Lyα photons (right). The curves show results for several different IGM ionized fractions, as labelled in the left panel. Note that we do not show curves for
xi = 0.5 or xi = 0.9 in the right panel, as they are very noisy at low energies (although the high-energy limit is well-behaved).

The left panel of Figure 3 shows the corresponding fractions
lost to collisionally excited HI line photons. Note the line structure apparent at xi ≤ 10−3 ; the features are separated by ∼ 10 eV
and correspond to multiple excitations of HI atoms. Although the
structure around these features appears noisy, it is real and remains
unchanged in other Monte Carlo tests. However, as noted above
these features blend together by xi ∼ 10−2 . Note that collisional
excitation becomes important at lower photon energies than does
ionization, because the lines require less energy; in nearly neutral

gas, these lines are clearly the dominant process even near the ionization threshold.
Interestingly, the right panel of Figure 3 shows that the ratio
fLyα /fexcite is nearly independent of both energy and xi : it depends almost entirely on the atomic physics of HI. The weak energy
dependence near threshold occurs because the different levels feed
into Lyα in different ways. The (very) weak dependence on xi ,
with the Lyα fraction increasing slightly with xi , is probably because efficient electron-electron interactions in highly-ionized gas
bring electrons to the Lyα threshold energy more rapidly. The overc 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

Secondary ionization and heating by fast electrons

7

all fraction of ∼ 80% can easily be estimated from the oscillator
strengths (Pritchard & Furlanetto 2007).
The remaining energy, shown in the right panel of Figure 2,
heats the IGM. The curves vary only slowly at large E, but the
behavior at E <
∼ 100 eV is complicated by the ionization and line
thresholds. Note that the features here are caused by the combination of these processes.

7.1 Comparison to previous work
Calculations similar to ours have appeared several times over
the past four decades. The most recent are Shull & van Steenberg
(1985), Xu & McCray (1991), and Valdés & Ferrara (2008).
Xu & McCray (1991) used the degradation equation
(Spencer & Fano 1954), a fully analytic technique, to compute the
energy deposition fractions. They took the approximate (but fully
analytic) ionization and excitation cross-sections from Johnson
(1972), and explicitly included all excitations with n ≤ 10,
although only for a pure hydrogen gas.
We have generated a similar set of scenarios to Xu & McCray
(1991) for comparison purposes, in which we include only hydrogen target atoms, use their Coulomb logarithm, and extrapolate the
excitation cross-sections to only n ≤ 10 levels. Over the range
xi = 10−4 –0.9, we find generally good agreement between the
two sets of results at E = 2 keV (where Xu & McCray 1991 report
detailed deposition fractions). The deviations in the energy deposition fractions are always smaller than a few percent (in absolute
terms), with our fheat typically slightly larger and our other fractions slightly smaller; the differences are largest at large ionized
fractions. We note that Dalgarno et al. (1999) also found slightly
larger heating fractions than Xu & McCray (1991). At xi < 0.01,
all of our results agree to within 1% (again in absolute terms).
Given that we use completely different methods and cross-sections,
we regard this agreement as excellent. There is also good qualitative agreement in the shapes of our energy deposition curves, and
especially in the features from excitation and ionization that appear
at small xi .
In contrast, Shull & van Steenberg (1985) used a Monte Carlo
method very similar to ours, although we have added several interactions (namely excitation to higher levels) and updated the crosssections for most of the others (including the Coulomb logarithm
in the heating component). Despite these differences, our results
agree to similar (few percent) accuracy in the high-energy limit
(or specifically at 3 keV, where Shull & van Steenberg 1985 provide detailed results). Figure 4 provides a detailed comparison as
a function of xi ; the solid and dashed curves show our results and
those from Shull & van Steenberg (1985), respectively.7
As one might expect given their lack of data for excitations
to high n states, Shull & van Steenberg (1985) somewhat underestimate the importance of collisional excitation, which can cause
a discrepancy of up to ∼ 6% with respect to our results at small
neutral fractions. They overestimate fion by a similar amount compared to our calculations, but fheat agrees rather well (although our
results clearly have more curvature than theirs). Overall, we regard
this agreement as quite good.
Valdés & Ferrara (2008) also used a Monte Carlo model to
examine the energy deposition fractions for high-energy electrons,

7 For f
Lyα we have used their expression for the fraction of energy deposited in collisional excitation of HI, multiplied by a factor 0.8 as in Figure 3.

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

Figure 4. Comparison of our results (points) to previous fitting formulae from Shull & van Steenberg (1985) (thick curves) and Valdés & Ferrara
(2008) (thin curves). The dotted curves and open diamonds show fheat .
The solid and dashed curves (crosses and open squares) show fion and
fLyα , respectively. Most are evaluated at E = 3 keV, except for those
from Valdés & Ferrara (2008), who use E = 2 keV.

with E > 3 keV. They included most of the same processes
we have, albeit with different cross-sections in most cases. The
most significant difference is their treatment of collisional excitation; they took values from Stone et al. (2002), who computed
their cross-sections with the scaled plane-wave Born approximation. Stone et al. (2002) show explicit comparisons with the CCC
database; the CCC values differ by <
∼ 20%. However, most significantly Stone et al. (2002) only compute excitation cross-sections
to the np angular momentum sublevels. Although these transitions
are typically dominant, the others are certainly non-negligible.
Valdés & Ferrara (2008) present detailed results for the highenergy limit and offer alternate fitting functions to those from
Shull & van Steenberg (1985); Figure 4 also includes a comparison to their results (dotted curves). The agreement with ours is not
nearly as good as for Shull & van Steenberg (1985). They find a
much lower rate of heating at moderate and large ionized fractions
(by up to ∼ 20% at xi ∼ 0.01) and correspondingly larger rates
of excitation and (especially) ionization. The agreement is particularly poor at xi <
∼ 1 (although the practical importance of this
regime is fairly small). The source of this discrepancy is unclear;
our excitation cross-sections match closely in the high-energy limit
(Stone et al. 2002), and our ionization cross-sections are in good
agreement over the entire energy range (e.g., comparing the CCC
database to Kim & Rudd 1994).
Another difference between our results and Valdés & Ferrara
(2008) is in the fraction of excitation energy deposited as Lyα photons. As shown in Figure 3, we find fLyα /fexcite ≈ 0.8 throughout
the entire energy range. In contrast, Valdés & Ferrara (2008) find
fLyα /fexcite ≈ 0.7. This discrepancy probably results from their
inclusion only of excitations to the np sublevels; the mixing fractions for the (rarer) excitations to the other sublevels can be larger,
especially at n = 3 (where atoms in the 3p state cannot decay
through Lyα, but those in the 3s or 3d states must).

8

S. R. Furlanetto & S. Johnson Stoever

Figure 5. Energy deposition fractions in HI ionization (left) and heating (right) as a function of electron energy. The curves in each panel show results for
several different IGM ionized fractions, with log xi = −4, −3, −2, and −1, from top to bottom. The solid curves show our calculations; the dotted curves
show the fits from Ricotti et al. (2002); see eqs. (13-14) in the text.

Over lower energies, the agreement with previous results
is less clear. Valdés & Ferrara (2008) examined only the highenergy limit, but Shull & van Steenberg (1985) studied the entire
range. They presented few numerical results at lower energies, but
Ricotti et al. (2002) provided the following fits to their results (see
also Volonteri & Gnedin 2009):

xi (even leaving aside the features from the ionization and excitation thresholds). We suspect this is why a single, separable fitting
function fails, and we have not attempted to find another form. Instead, we recommend interpolating the exact results.

28 eV 0.4 0.2
xi (1 − x0.38
)2
i
E
+0.39(1 − x0.41
)1.76
E > 28 eV
i

8 AN EXAMPLE APPLICATION: DISCRETE SOURCES
IN THE EARLY UNIVERSE
(13)

11 eV 0.7 0.4
xi (1 − x0.34
)2
3.9811
i
E
+[1 − (1.0 − x0.27
)1.32 ]
E > 11 eV,
i

(14)

R
fion,HI

R
fheat

≈

≈

−0.69









and zero otherwise. The terms without energy dependence describe
the high-energy limiting values discussed above; the final term in
each expression was added to account for the energy dependence,
at least roughly.
Figure 5 compares these expressions to our detailed results
over the entire relevant energy range. The left panel shows fion,HI ,
while the right panel shows fheat . The sets of curves take log xi =
−4, −3, −2, and −1, from top to bottom, with the solid curves
showing our results and the dotted curves using the fits. Although
(for the most part) the fits are reasonably accurate at E > 1 keV,8
they provide a relatively poor match at lower energies. We therefore
caution against these fits for high-accuracy work.
The advantage of equations (13-14) is that the energy and xi
dependence are separable, which simplifies their application to numerical work. Unfortunately, Figures 2 and 3 show that the functional dependence over energy can change quite substantially with

8 The largest deviation in the high energy limit, of ∼ 6% in absolute terms,
occurs in fheat when xi = 0.01. Note, however, that our result actually
agrees with the exact result from Shull & van Steenberg (1985) well (0.32
for both); the error comes from the fitting function itself.

As a simple example of the utility of our results, we briefly describe here an application to X-ray heating by discrete sources in
the high-z universe. Suppose a source emitting ultraviolet and Xray photons with a power law spectrum, Lν ∝ ν −α , is embedded in
the IGM. We will take α = 1.5 for concreteness. The photons will
gradually be absorbed as they stream through the neutral gas surrounding the source: ultraviolet photons just above the ionization
edge have a very short mean free path, but higher-energy photons
can reach much larger distances. The comoving mean free path of
an X-ray photon with energy Eγ is
−1/3

λX ≈ 4.9xi



1+z
15

−2 

Eγ
300 eV

3

Mpc.

(15)

Thus, for a point at a finite distance from our source, all photons with energies Eγ < Emin will be strongly attenuated, while
those above this threshold will be more or less unaffected. We approximate this situation by assuming zero transmission below Emin
and complete transmission above that threshold. We then compute
the net fraction of absorbed energy that is deposited as heat:9
f¯heat =

P R∞
i

Emin

dEγ Eγ−α−1 ni σi (Eγ )(Eγ − Ei )fheat

P R∞
i

Emin

dEγ Eγ−α ni σi (Eγ )

, (16)

9 By integrating over σ here, we are implicitly assuming the optically thin
limit for the surviving photons. If a system is optically thick, it will weight
high-energy photons more strongly.

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

Secondary ionization and heating by fast electrons

9

Figure 6. Energy deposition fractions for the secondary electrons integrated over sample spectra (with α = 1.5), assuming optically thin absorption. The left
panel shows f¯ion,HI , the upper right panel shows f¯Lyα , and the lower right panel shows f¯heat . The solid, long-dashed, short-dashed, and dot-dashed curves
take log xi = −4, −3, −2, and −1, respectively. The solid squares show the high-energy fit from Shull & van Steenberg (1985), with the same ordering
from top to bottom.

where the sum is over all species i and σi is the photoionization
cross-section (Verner et al. 1996). Here the numerator is the integral (over all photon energies Eγ ) of the ionization rate multiplied
by the fraction of the secondary electron’s energy (Eγ − Ei ) deposited as heat. The denominator normalizes f¯ to the total energy
deposition rate. We can compute f¯ion,HI and f¯Lyα in a similar fashion, replacing fheat with fion,HI or fLyα . (Note that f¯ still does not
include the energy deposited by the initial ionization. This is why
the sum of these fractions is much smaller than unity at low energies.)
The curves in Figure 6 show these two quantities at several
different ionized fractions (log xi = −4, −3, −2, and −1, from
top to bottom in the left hand panel). The solid squares show the
asymptotic high-energy estimates from the Shull & van Steenberg
(1985) fitting formulae. (These are the terms in eqs. 13-14 without
any energy dependence.)
These fitting formulae provide reasonable order-of-magnitude
estimates so long as Emin >
∼ 300 eV (or slightly higher if xi ∼
0.1), although they systematically underestimate f¯Lyα and f¯ion,HI .
These deviations are most significant at small ionized fractions,
where heating is least important. We therefore again recommend
interpolation of the exact results for high-accuracy work, especially
if the heating by soft X-rays E <
∼ 300 eV is included.

9 DISCUSSION
Using a Monte Carlo model, we have re-examined the fate of fast
electrons scattering through a background gas of primordial origin. We included electron-electron scattering as well as collisional
ionization and excitation of HI, HeI, and HeII, explicitly tracking all levels up to n = 4 and using an analytic extrapolation
to higher levels. We separately followed all excitations producing HI Lyα photons, which can be important in modeling the obc 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

servable properties of the IGM at high redshifts (see Kuhlen et al.
2006 and Furlanetto et al. 2006, for example) and have not been explicitly tracked previously except at the highest energies. We used
recent calculations of ionization and excitation cross-sections at
E < 1 keV and extrapolated to higher energies using the Bethe
approximation.
−3
In highly neutral gas (xi <
∼ 10 ), we found that ∼ 20% of
the electron energy is deposited as heat, with the remainder split
roughly equally between ionization and excitation. In this regime,
the results are not strongly sensitive to xi , at least at high energies, because most of the heating comes from secondary electrons,
with energies below 10 eV. At higher xi , the heating fraction rises
rapidly, exceeding ∼ 65% by xi ∼ 0.1. We find that the excitation
and ionization energy deposition rates are always comparable, and
that ∼ 80% of the excitation energy goes into HI Lyα regardless of
electron energy and xi .
Although our calculations used parameters appropriate to the
low-density IGM, our results may also be applied to denser systems, because the density only enters through the Coulomb logarithm affecting the electron-electron scattering rate. Varying the
density of target atoms by many orders of magnitude only affects
the energy deposition fractions by a few percent in absolute terms.
We also note that, when collective plasma effects are included, the
background temperature becomes irrelevant for the electron energies under consideration (Schunk & Hays 1971; Xu & McCray
1991).
For the most part, our results agree with previous estimates
from Shull & van Steenberg (1985) and Xu & McCray (1991), although we have found some discrepancies with the commonly-used
fitting formulae from the former. In general, at high energies their
results slightly underestimate the importance of collisional excitation but are otherwise accurate. At lower energies, the differences
in cross-sections become more important and the discrepancies increase (at least with reference to the fitting formulae of Ricotti et al.

10

S. R. Furlanetto & S. Johnson Stoever

2002). However, our results show substantial differences with those
of Valdés & Ferrara (2008), who examined the high-energy limit
with a Monte Carlo model similar to ours. These discrepancies are
especially large at moderate and high ionized fractions, where we
find substantially more heating and less ionization and excitation.
We also find that a higher fraction of excitation energy is deposited
in HI Lyα photons. The latter is probably due to our different treatments of collisional excitation (in particular, their neglect of excitations to states other than the np sublevels), but the source of the
former is unclear.
In any case, we advocate interpolation of the exact results
when high accuracy is necessary, especially because the energy
dependence is quite significant. Our detailed numerical results are
available upon request, including tables for the energy deposition
fractions at a variety of ionized fractions and C code to interpolate
to arbitrary ionized fractions and electron energies.

We thank M. Valdes for helpful comments. SRF was partially
supported by the NSF through grant AST-0829737, by the David
and Lucile Packard Foundation, and by NASA through the LUNAR
program. The LUNAR consortium (http://lunar.colorado.edu),
headquartered at the University of Colorado, is funded by
the NASA Lunar Science Institute (via Cooperative Agreement
NNA09DB30A) to investigate concepts for astrophysical observatories on the Moon. SJS was supported by a Research Experiences
for Undergraduates grant at UCLA, NSF PHY-0552500. We thank
Agner Fog for making a public version of the Mersenne Twister
algorithm available and Igor Bray and Yuri Ralchenko for making
the CCC database available electronically.

Pritchard J. R., Furlanetto S. R., 2006, MNRAS, 367, 1057
Pritchard J. R., Furlanetto S. R., 2007, MNRAS, 376, 1680
Ricotti M., Gnedin N. Y., Shull J. M., 2002, ApJ, 575, 49
Ricotti M., Ostriker J. P., 2004, MNRAS, 352, 547
Ricotti M., Ostriker J. P., Gnedin N. Y., 2005, MNRAS, 357, 207
Rybicki G. B., Lightman A. P., 1979, Radiative Processes in Astrophysics.
New York: Wiley
Schunk R. W., Hays P. B., 1971, Plan. Space Sci., 19, 113
Seager S., Sasselov D. D., Scott D., 1999, ApJ, 523, L1
Shull J. M., 1979, ApJ, 234, 761
Shull J. M., van Steenberg M. E., 1985, ApJ, 298, 268
Spencer L. V., Fano U., 1954, Physical Review, 93, 1172
Spitzer L., 1962, Physics of Fully Ionized Gases. New York: Interscience
(2nd edition), 1962
Spitzer L. J., Scott E. H., 1969, ApJ, 158, 161
Spitzer L. J., Tomasko M. G., 1968, ApJ, 152, 971
Stone P. M., Kim Y. K., Desclaux J. P., 2002, J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand.
Technol., 107, 327
Valdés M., Ferrara A., 2008, MNRAS, 387, L8
Venkatesan A., Giroux M. L., Shull J. M., 2001, ApJ, 563, 1
Verner D. A., Ferland G. J., Korista K. T., Yakovlev D. G., 1996, ApJ, 465
Volonteri M., Gnedin N. Y., 2009, ApJ, 703, 2113
Xu Y., McCray R., 1991, ApJ, 375, 190
Xu Y., Ross R. R., McCray R., 1991, ApJ, 371, 280

REFERENCES
Bergeron J., Collin-Souffrin S., 1973, A&A, 25, 1
Bethe H. A., 1930, Annals of Physics, 5, 325
Bray I., Fursa D. V., Kheifets A. S., Stelbovics A. T., 2002, Journal of
Physics B Atomic Molecular Physics, 35, 117
Chen X., Kamionkowski M., 2004, PRD, 70, 043502
Chen X., Miralda-Escudé J., 2008, ApJ, 684, 18
Chuzhoy L., Alvarez M. A., Shapiro P. R., 2006, ApJ, 648, L1
Dalgarno A., Yan M., Liu W., 1999, ApJS, 125, 237
Dunkley J., Spergel D. N., Komatsu E., Hinshaw G., Larson D., Nolta M. R.,
Odegard N., Page L., Bennett C. L., Gold B., Hill R. S., Jarosik N.,
Weiland J. L., Halpern M., Kogut A., Limon M., Meyer S. S., Tucker
G. S., Wollack E., Wright E. L., 2009, ApJ, 701, 1804
Furlanetto S. R., 2006, MNRAS, 371, 867
Furlanetto S. R., Oh S. P., Briggs F. H., 2006, Physics Reports, 433, 181
Furlanetto S. R., Oh S. P., Pierpaoli E., 2006, PRD, 74, 103502
Habing H. J., Goldsmith D. W., 1971, ApJ, 166, 525
Hirata C. M., 2006, MNRAS, 367, 259
Johnson L. C., 1972, ApJ, 174, 227
Jura M. A., 1971, PhD thesis, AA(HARVARD UNIVERSITY.)
Kim Y., Rudd M. E., 1994, PRA, 50, 3954
Kuhlen M., Madau P., 2005, MNRAS, 363, 1069
Kuhlen M., Madau P., Montgomery R., 2006, ApJ, 637, L1
Mapelli M., Ferrara A., Pierpaoli E., 2006, MNRAS, 369, 1719
Matsumoto M., Nishimura T., 1998, ACM Transactions on Modeling and
Computer Simulation, 8, 3
Oh S. P., 2001, ApJ, 553, 499
Oh S. P., Haiman Z., 2003, MNRAS, 346, 456
Omidvar K., 1969, Physical Review, 177, 212
Opal C. B., Peterson W. K., Beaty E. C., 1971, J. Chem. Phys., 55, 4100
c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

