D RAFT VERSION O CTOBER 28, 2018
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 9/08/03

LARGE-SCALE STRUCTURE SHOCKS AT LOW AND HIGH REDSHIFTS
S TEVEN R. F URLANETTO 1 & A BRAHAM L OEB 2

arXiv:astro-ph/0312435v1 16 Dec 2003

Draft version October 28, 2018

ABSTRACT
Cosmological simulations show that, at the present time, a substantial fraction of the gas in the intergalactic
medium (IGM) has been shock-heated to T & 105 K. Here we develop an analytic model to describe the fraction of shocked, moderately overdense gas in the IGM. The model is an extension of the Press & Schechter
(1974) description for the mass function of halos: we assume that large-scale structure shocks occur at a fixed
overdensity during nonlinear collapse. This in turn allows us to compute the fraction of gas at a given redshift
that has been shock-heated to a specified temperature. We show that, if strong shocks occur at turnaround,
our model provides a reasonable description of the temperature distribution seen in cosmological simulations
at z ∼ 0, although it does overestimate the importance of weak shocks. We then apply our model to shocks at
high redshifts. We show that, before reionization, the thermal energy of the IGM is dominated by large-scale
structure shocks (rather than virialized objects). These shocks can have a variety of effects, including stripping . 10% of the gas from dark matter minihalos, accelerating cosmic rays, and creating a diffuse radiation
background from inverse Compton and cooling radiation. This radiation background develops before the first
stars form and could have measurable effects on molecular hydrogen formation and the spin temperature of the
21 cm transition of neutral hydrogen. Finally, we show that shock-heating will also be directly detectable by
redshifted 21 cm measurements of the neutral IGM in the young universe.
Subject headings: cosmology: theory – intergalactic medium – large-scale structure of the universe
1. INTRODUCTION

One of the major achievements of cosmology over the past
two decades has been the development of a coherent and
testable paradigm for structure formation. In the modern picture, small density inhomogeneities imprinted on the universe
during inflation grow continuously through gravitational instability. These density fluctuations still have small amplitude
at the time of cosmological recombination (z ∼ 1000), when
the cosmic microwave background (CMB) is last scattered.
At this epoch, structure formation is straightforward to study
analytically because the fluctuations are still linear. Observations of the CMB have shown convincing evidence that our
theories of structure formation accurately describe the universe at this early phase (e.g., Spergel et al. 2003). Eventually, the perturbation amplitude grows sufficiently large for
nonlinear effects to become important: at this point the first
gravitationally bound structures begin to form. The structure formation problem then passes beyond the scope of analytic approaches (except in the case of perfectly spherical collapse; Gunn & Gott 1972). The most successful approximation for studying the properties of gravitational instability in
the nonlinear regime is the so-called Zel’dovich approximation (Zel’Dovich 1970), which uses Lagrangian (rather than
Eulerian) perturbation theory. The theory shows that collapse
will occur first along a single axis, creating a “pancake” or
sheet, then along a second axis, creating a filament, before
finally converging towards a single point.
Fully non-linear treatments of structure formation had to
await the development of numerical simulations. These simulations confirm the behavior predicted by the Zel’dovich
approximation: at low redshifts, the matter in the universe
1 Division of Physics, Mathematics, & Astronomy; California Institute of Technology; Mail Code 130-33; Pasadena, CA 91125;
sfurlane@tapir.caltech.edu
2 Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138; aloeb@cfa.harvard.edu

organizes itself into a complex network of sheets and filaments (with galaxies and galaxy clusters at their intersections) known as the “cosmic web.” This paradigm has had
admirable success reproducing the large-scale distribution of
galaxies in redshift surveys (e.g., de Lapparent et al. 1986)
and in describing the absorption features of the Lyα forest (e.g., Cen et al. 1994; Hernquist et al. 1996; Theuns et al.
1998).
While the dark matter accretes smoothly onto the cosmic
web, the baryons do not: their infall velocities onto these
structures often exceed the local sound speed and a complex network of shocks forms. Probably most important
are the well-known virial shocks that form when halos collapse. However, cosmological simulations also contain many
shocks outside of collapsed halos; these fill a fair fraction
(∼ 10%) of the volume of the universe (Cen & Ostriker 1999;
Keshet et al. 2003; Ryu et al. 2003) and play an important
role in shaping the properties of baryons in the local universe. Simulations predict that & 20% of all baryons are in
the “warm-hot intergalactic medium” (WHIM) with T ∼ 105 –
107 K (Davé et al. 2001), most of which have densities below
those characteristic of virialized objects.
Unfortunately, there is little analytic understanding of the
distribution of shocks in the intergalactic medium (IGM).
Cen & Ostriker (1999) argued that the characteristic temperature of the gas can be computed by simply associating the
postshock temperature with a fluctuation collapsing over the
age of the universe that has just become nonlinear at the
present epoch. This provides a rough guide to the expected
strength of the shocks but does not predict how much gas
has been shocked or give a detailed temperature distribution.
Nath & Trentham (1997) expanded this treatment using the
Zel’dovich approximation to give rough estimates of the fraction of gas in the WHIM phase, but they were not able to
predict the detailed properties of shocks at any redshift.
There has also been little consideration of the role that similar large-scale structure shocks play at higher redshifts. One

2
reason that they are significant in the local universe is that the
characteristic shock temperature (Tsh ∼ 107 K; see Davé et al.
2001) is much larger than the mean temperature of the photoionized IGM (TIGM ∼ 104 K). As redshift increases, Tsh decreases rapidly; at z & 2, the characteristic temperature given
by Cen & Ostriker (1999) is not much larger than TIGM , so
we expect strong shocks to be much less common. However, before reionization, the typical temperature of the IGM
is much smaller and shocks can again become important (despite the much smaller-scale perturbations that collapse). Because shocks occur in overdense regions, where galaxies also
preferentially occur, they obviously help to determine the environments in which most galaxies reside. The large-scale
environment has important consequences for feedback from
(and on) collapsed objects, but this point has not been considered in the past.
In this paper, we consider a new analytic model for the temperature distribution of shocked, moderately overdense gas in
the IGM. We are guided by the fact that the distribution of
collapsed objects is well-described, to a surprisingly high precision, by the Press-Schechter formalism (Press & Schechter
1974). The key ingredients to this model are (1) Gaussian
statistics for the density field and (2) spherical collapse of
perturbations in the nonlinear regime. Motivated by the success of this formalism, we use the same assumptions to model
shocked gas in the IGM. We show that our simple model
provides a reasonable fit to existing (low-redshift) simulation
data if only strong shocks are considered. In §2, we present
our formalism for the large-scale structure shocks and use it to
describe the basic properties of shocks at both low and high
redshifts. We then move on to consider the role that highredshift shocks might play. In §3 we describe three important effects that the shocks can have: accelerating particles to
high energies, creating a diffuse background radiation field
(principally through cooling radiation), and stripping minihalo gas. In §4 we consider the observable consequences of
high-redshift shocks. Finally, we summarize our main conclusions in §5.
Throughout the discussion we assume a flat, Λ–dominated
cosmology, with density parameters Ωm = 0.3, ΩΛ = 0.7, and
Ωb = 0.047 in matter, cosmological constant, and baryons, respectively. In the numerical calculations, we assume h = 0.7,
where the Hubble constant is H0 = 100h km s−1 Mpc−1 . We
take a scale-invariant primordial power spectrum (n = 1) normalized to an amplitude of σ8 = 0.9 on 8h−1 Mpc spheres.
These values are consistent with the most recent measurements (Spergel et al. 2003).
2. A MODEL OF SHOCKS FROM LARGE-SCALE STRUCTURE

Following Cen & Ostriker (1999) and Keshet et al. (2003),
we associate large-scale shocks with the collapse of nonlinear
objects. The shock velocity vs is then approximately equal to
the length scale of the perturbation divided by the age of the
universe, or
vs ≈ H(z)R p ,
(1)
where R p is the physical radius that the region would have had
if it expanded uniformly with the Hubble flow (i.e., 4πR3p /3 =
Ms /ρ̄z , where Ms is the mass of the shocked region and ρ̄z is
the mean density of the universe at redshift z). The postshock
temperature Tsh is then
Tsh = η

µm p 2
v,
γkB s

(2)

where µm p is the mean particle mass, γ is the adiabatic index of the gas, and η is the square of the Mach number of the
shock in the downstream medium. Given a shock velocity and
the sound speed of the IGM gas, η is fixed in terms of γ by the
jump conditions; however, the definition of the shock velocity
in equation (1) is only approximate, and we let η encapsulate
uncertainties in both the collapse time and the relevant length
scale. In most of the following discussion we will assume
strong shocks, for which η = 5/16 (if γ = 5/3). Note that the
shock temperature depends on both the mass of the perturbation and on redshift. Cen & Ostriker (1999) and Davé et al.
(2001) argued that choosing R p to be the length scale associated with the characteristic nonlinear mass at a given epoch
reproduces the typical temperature of the WHIM gas in their
simulations.
In order to compute the distribution of shocks, we make
an analogy with the usual Press-Schechter mass function
(Press & Schechter 1974). The fundamental assumptions behind this mass function are: (i) the initial density field is Gaussian, and (ii) the threshold overdensity for a particle to be
attached to a halo is given by the dynamics of a collapsing
spherical top-hat perturbation. In this model, the fraction of
mass in collapsed halos of mass M > M0 is


δc (z)
F(M > M0 , z) = erfc √
.
(3)
2σ(M0 )
Here σ(M0 ) is the variance in the density power spectrum
smoothed over a mass scale M0 and δc (z) = δc0 /D(z) is the
linearly extrapolated overdensity corresponding to the collapse of a spherical perturbation. D(z) is the cosmological
growth factor and δc0 ≈ 1.69 depends very weakly on the assumed cosmology. The mass function can be obtained by simply differentiating equation (3). This mass function matches
the distribution measured in cosmological simulations to
good accuracy, although modifications including ellipsoidal
(rather than spherical) collapse do improve the fit somewhat
(Sheth & Tormen 1999; Jenkins et al. 2001), though perhaps
not at the highest redshifts (Jang-Condell & Hernquist 2001).
Here we make the ansatz that we can identify shocks with
a different density threshold δx during the collapse. The entire Press-Schechter formalism carries over to our situation
so long as we change the density threshold from that for collapse to the new value and choose the smoothing scale Msh
for a specified shock temperature Tsh through equations (1)
and (2). The resulting temperature distribution is


3 Msh d ln σ
df
=√
dTsh naive
2π Tsh dM Msh


δx (z)
δx2 (z)
,
(4)
×
exp
σ(Msh , z)
2σ 2 (Msh , z)
where d f is the fraction of IGM gas (by mass) that is shocked
to a temperature in the range (Tsh , Tsh + dTsh ). For reference,
3/2

γ 0.6 5/16 Tsh
13
Msh = 10 M⊙
5/3 µ η 106 K

3 

1+z
Ωm
×
,
(5)
h(z)
0.3
where h(z) = [Ωm (1 + z)3 + ΩΛ ]1/2 . Because the Tsh –Msh relation is itself redshift-dependent, the redshift dependence of σ
cannot be factored out (unlike for the mass function). Also,
we are interested only in the fraction of gas at a given temperature, not in the number density of such objects (which would

3
be more sensitive to the non-spherical nature of collapse). In
all other respects equation (4) is analogous to mass function
calculations.
We note that both η and δx are essentially free parameters in our formalism: in the purely spherical model, shocks
do not actually appear until complete collapse, so the density threshold and shock velocity are ad hoc additions to the
model. However, we will show below (see §2.1) that a simple,
physically motivated set of choices provides a reasonable description of the existing simulation data for strongly shocked
material. A plausible point for the shock to first appear is
turnaround [δx ≈ 1.06/D(z)], the point at which the perturbation breaks off from the cosmological expansion. In purely
spherical collapse, of course, no shocks would appear until
shell-crossing occurs at virialization. However, turnaround
marks the point at which the flow begins to converge. It is
therefore reasonable to expect asymmetries in the collapse to
begin to shock the gas at this point. Another advantage of
associating shocks with turnaround is that the shock velocity
in equation (1) exactly equals the peculiar velocity of the collapsing gas. Because most shocks are strong, we then assume
η = 5/16 for simplicity. We expect this choice to work best for
regions with infall velocities much larger than the IGM sound
speed. If the two are comparable, asymmetries in the collapse
would have to be extremely strong for shocks to develop before shell-crossing. In this regime, we might therefore expect
δx to be closer to δc .
We also note that our formalism does not describe (or replace) virial shocks around collapsing halos. The “large-scale
structure shocks” that we describe have much lower velocities
because they occur earlier in the infall process. If we compare
the shock temperature Tsh on a given mass scale to the virial
temperature Tvir on the same scale, we find


2/3 
1/3
γ 5/16
Ωm
Ωm
(1 + z)3
Tvir
, (6)
≃4 2
Tsh
h (z)
5/3 η
0.3
Ωm (z)
so the virial shocks will still be relatively strong.
There is one more subtlety in computing the temperature
distribution: a particular trajectory that reaches δx (z) at some
mass Msh may reach δc (z) at another mass Mh < Msh . Physically, the particle could belong to a galaxy embedded inside
a large-scale filament or sheet. We wish to exclude such gas
from our distribution because it does not truly belong to the
IGM. (It will also be at a different temperature: the gas initially virializes and then cools.) Fortunately, it is straightforward to identify these particles in the Press-Schechter model.
Given that a particle has (δx , Msh ), we wish to compute the
probability that it has (δc , Mh ). The problem is formally identical to the “progenitor” problem solved by Lacey & Cole
(1993), with the solution
r
dp
2 σ(Mh )[δc (z) − δx(z)]
=
dMh
π [σ 2 (Mh ) − σ 2(Msh , z)]3/2


dσ
−[δc (z) − δx(z)]2
×
. (7)
exp
dM Mh
2[σ 2 (Mh ) − σ 2 (Msh , z)]
Here d p/dMh is the probability that a particle is contained in
a halo of mass Mh at z, given that it is part of a shock with
mass scale Msh at z. Then

 Z Msh


dp
df
df
dMh
1−
.
(8)
=
dTsh
dTsh naive
dMh
Mmin
We note that this prescription fits nicely into the “merger tree”
algorithm commonly used in “extended Press-Schechter”

studies (e.g., Lacey & Cole 1993). To compute the probability that a halo of mass Mh will merge into a halo of mass
Msh at a later time zv , we simply substitute δx (z) → δc (zv ) in
equation (7). Clearly, zv is fixed by the dynamics of collapse,
D(zv ) = (δx /δc )D(z). But this is the same relation as between
the collapse and turnaround times in the spherical collapse
model. We therefore find that the probability for a halo to lie
in a turnaround shock of a region with mass Msh at z is the
same as for the halo to lie in that region once it has collapsed.
The correction for bound objects would not be needed if the
large-scale shocks were able to strip gas from collapsed objects. In the local universe, this occurs through ram pressure
stripping and is fairly inefficient: in galaxy clusters, observations and simulations show that the timescale is short only in
dense cluster cores (Quilis et al. 2000), and it is likely to be
much longer in the low-density IGM. However, if the gas in a
bound object is unable to cool radiatively and is then shocked
during infall, it may be able to escape its host halo into the
IGM. We will examine the implications of this process in detail in §3.3.
Note that the postshock temperature depends on the
whether the gas is ionized or neutral. Any shock with Tsh >
104 K will ionize gas after the shock, decreasing the actual
temperature of the postshock gas by a factor ∼ 2. If the gas
is originally neutral, the shock will also lose energy ionizing the gas. For simplicity, we assume that the universe is
completely ionized for all redshifts lower than the reionization redshift, z < zr , and neutral for z > zr . The temperatures
we quote for shocks before reionization do not include ionization by the shock; they should thus be interpreted as the
mean thermal energy per baryon. The reionization redshift
also affects the minimum halo mass able to colllapse. If the
universe is neutral and cold, we take the “filter mass” Mfil
or time-averaged Jeans mass, as the minimum collapse mass
(Gnedin & Hui 1998). (Because turnaround shocks occur earlier in collapse than virialization does, we actually evaluate
Mfil at the redshift corresponding to collapse of the object.) If
the universe is ionized, we take the minimum mass to have
Tvir > 2 × 105 K, below which gas infall is suppressed by
photoionization heating (Efstathiou 1992; Thoul & Weinberg
1995; Navarro & Steinmetz 1997), although near the time of
reionization this probably overestimates the minimum mass
(Dijkstra et al. 2003).
2.1. Comparison to Simulations
While we have presented a plausible picture in which η and
δx are chosen to match strong shocks at halo turnaround, these
are actually free parameters that are not fixed by our model.
In Figure 1, we show how their choice changes our differential temperature distribution function, d f /dT . The top panel
shows η = 0.16, 0.24, and 5/16 (dotted, short-dashed, and
solid curves, respectively), with δx = 1.06. [Note that the
simulations of Keshet et al. (2003) suggest η ≈ 0.16.] The
sharp rise at low temperatures is the effect of the finite Jeans
mass that we have imposed. Structures collapsing near the
mass threshold cannot have any gaseous subcomponents, so
the fraction of gas associated with bound objects rapidly approaches zero. The effect of varying η is simply to translate the distribution along the temperature axis: we have not
changed the fraction of mass associated with each mass scale,
only the temperature associated with that scale. The bottom
panel fixes η = 5/16 but sets δx = 0.8, 1.06, and 1.20 (longdashed, solid, and dash-dotted curves, respectively). The effect here is more subtle: for example, by increasing the thresh-

4

F IG . 1.— The distribution of gas temperature at z = 0, not including collapsed objects. Top panel: The curves have η = 0.16, 0.24, and 5/16 (dotted,
short-dashed, and solid lines, respectively); all assume δx = 1.06. Bottom
panel: The curves have δx = 0.8, 1.06, and 1.2 (long-dashed, solid, and dotdashed lines, respectively); all assume η = 5/16.

old overdensity required for shocks, we decrease the mass
fraction at each temperature. Because σ(M) is not linear, the
characteristic temperature also changes (i.e., the peak of the
temperature distribution).
Comparison to Figure 5 in Davé et al. (2001) shows that
our fiducial choice gives a reasonably good fit to the shape of
the temperature distribution at z = 0. We find that ∼ 13% of
the gas is shocked to high temperature, compared to ∼ 25%
in the simulations. The comparison is somewhat difficult because Davé et al. (2001) include both bound objects (in particular galaxy groups) and gas at or near the mean density that
is nevertheless shocked to high temperatures (see their Figure 4), while we expect our formalism to describe only the
moderately overdense gas. We also find that our formalism
overestimates the fraction of gas with Tsh ∼ 105 K. This is not
surprising, because these shocks correspond to systems fairly
close to the minimum mass for galaxy formation in an ionized
medium. The infall velocities are therefore not much larger
than the sound speed of the gas, and shocks probably develop
only later in the collapse process for such objects. We expect
our model to apply best when the characteristic shock speed
is much larger than the sound speed of the IGM. On the other
hand, capturing weak shocks is difficult in simulations with finite resolution (Keshet et al. 2003; Ryu et al. 2003), and they
may underestimate the fraction of gas shocked to moderate
temperatures.
2.2. Temperature Evolution of the IGM

We can now compute the temperature evolution of the IGM,
including shocks at both turnaround and virialization. The results are shown in Figure 2. We assume that the universe is
reionized at zr = 8; at this point the minimum mass for collapse increases substantially. The top panel shows the fraction
of gas that is part of the shocked phase, Fsh , at a given redshift
(solid curve) as well as the fraction that is part of collapsed
objects (dashed curve). The upper and lower dotted curves
show Fsh before reionization if we only include shocks with
Tsh > 104 K and 105 K, respectively. The bottom panel shows

F IG . 2.— Top panel: The fraction of gas in the shocked phase (solid curve)
and in collapsed objects (long-dashed curve). The upper and lower dotted
curves show the fraction with Tsh > 104 K and 105 K, respectively. We have
assumed that reionization occurs instantaneously at zr = 8, at which point
the minimum halo mass increases dramatically. Bottom panel: The massaveraged temperature of the IGM, including shocked gas only (solid curve)
and collapsed objects only (dashed curve). The dotted curve shows the temperature including only shocks with Tsh > 104 .

the mass-averaged temperature of the IGM. The solid line is
for shocked gas while the dashed line is for collapsed gas (the
temperature of each halo is set to Tvir , and we have used the
Press-Schechter mass function for the number density of halos at each mass). The dotted line shows the mean temperature
from shocks if we include only those with Tsh > 104 K (i.e.,
ionizing shocks). We set the temperature of the rest of the gas
to zero in each case. The thermal energy of the IGM is dominated by shocked gas at z & 5. At the present time, however,
virialized objects determine the mean temperature: so long
as a fair fraction of the mass is in such objects, their strong
bounding shocks dominate over the IGM shocks [compare to
equation (6)].
We see that the fraction in shocks is much larger than that
in collapsed objects at z & 3, except in a short window near to
zr . Perhaps surprisingly, the fraction of intergalactic shocked
gas actually decreases at low redshifts in our model as more
and more mass is incorporated into collapsed objects. The
bottom panel of Figure 3 shows the temperature distribution
function at several redshifts. The solid, long-dashed, shortdashed, and dotted lines show results for z = 0, 1, 2, and 3,
respectively. The top panel shows the fraction of gas nominally at each shock temperature that is actually part of bound
subhalos. The bound fraction rises rapidly above the minimum mass and then approaches a constant value at a given
redshift. The asymptotic value is less than unity because of
the Jeans mass: a non-negligible fraction of the accreted dark
matter is bound up in potential wells too small to retain gas.
It is clear that the characteristic temperature of the shocked
gas declines rapidly with redshift; this is simply because the
characteristic mass scale also declines rapidly. At z ∼ 2–3,
the nonlinear mass scale is still sufficiently close to the minimum collapse mass that a significant fraction of the gas is
contained in shocks rather than collapsed objects. By z = 0,
most of the shocked gas has already entered collapsed ob-

5

F IG . 3.— The distribution of gas temperature in the shocked phase (bottom
panel) and the fraction of nominally shocked gas that is bound to collapsed
halos (top panel). Solid, long-dashed, short-dashed, and dotted curves are for
z = 0, 1, 2, and 3, respectively. All assume δx = 1.06 and η = 5/16.

jects. An important consequence of this is that, at z & 2,
most of the shocks have T ∼ 105 K. Because this is close to
TIGM , the typical Mach number of shocks is only ∼ 3. We expect our prescription for shocks occurring at turnaround to be
too optimistic in this case, because large asymmetries would
be required to produce shocks in such a low Mach number
flow. Thus, our model possibly overestimates the importance
of shocks between reionization and z ∼ 2 (compare to Figure
5 of Davé et al. 2001). Figure 3 demonstrates that (with fixed
δx and η) our model does not accurately characterize the importance of shocks with Mach numbers smaller than 10. The
fit may be improved by increasing the density threshold at low
Mach numbers or by decreasing η (and hence the shock velocity). We are primarily interested in the strong shocks prior
to reionization where this problem does not arise, and so we
keep the approach simple and fix these two parameters to their
fiducial values. It should also be noted that the finite resolution of the simulations may also cause them to miss shocks (or
smooth them out through numerical viscosity) at these redshifts; Ryu et al. (2003) find that shocks remain significant
out to at least z ∼ 2, in contrast to the results of Dave et al
(2001). A more careful treatment of shocks in the simulations
may provide better agreement with our model.
We wish to apply our model to the high-redshift IGM in order to consider the importance of shocks during that epoch.
The mean temperature of the diffuse IGM is quite small before reionization (at least if we neglect X-ray heating). After recombination, the IGM temperature remains coupled to
the CMB temperature through Thomson scattering off residual free electrons. This mechanism becomes inefficient at a
redshift zdc given by (Peebles 1993)
1 + zdc ≈ 132(Ωb h2 /0.02)2/5,

(9)

after which the temperature declines adiabatically as the
universe expands. This means that TIGM ≪ TCMB at z ∼
20, at least until the first generations of sources produce
sufficient X-rays to heat the IGM (see §3.2 below and
Chen & Miralda-Escudé 2003). The characteristic shock temperature, on the other hand, is much larger than this at z . 20.

F IG . 4.— The distribution of gas temperatures in the shocked phase (bottom
panel) and the fraction of nominally shocked gas that is bound to collapsed
halos (top panel). Solid, dashed, and dotted curves are for z = 10, 20, and 30,
respectively. All assume δx = 1.06 and η = 5/16.

Thus infall velocities are large and we expect our model to
provide a reasonable description. Figure 2 shows that, before reionization, the thermal energy of the IGM is dominated
by large-scale structure shocks rather than virialized objects.
The disparity gets larger at high redshifts. Essentially, the
threshold for halo collapse, Mfil , is near or even well above
the nonlinear mass scale at these epochs. The amount of mass
in collapsing gas is large compared to that in collapsed halos,
so it dominates the temperature of the IGM.
Figure 4 shows the temperature distribution for z = 10,
20, and 30. Again, the characteristic temperature increases
rapidly with cosmic time. At the highest redshifts, d f /dT
decreases smoothly with temperature and there is no characteristic temperature peak. This occurs because the nonlinear
mass scale is below the filter mass at these epochs. This is
also reflected in the bound fraction. This is small at high redshifts simply because the fraction of gas bound to any halo is
small.
Note that these figures do not include radiative cooling.
While cooling is quite inefficient in the local IGM, it does
become important at higher redshifts because the characteristic density increases and the cooling time decreases. Before
reionization, cooling of regions with T & 104 K is quite rapid;
however, cooling in weaker shocks is negligible because hydrogen remains neutral and the gas is metal-free. Moreover,
the infalling gas is continually accelerated by gravity, and our
picture of a single shock at turnaround is most likely too simple. In reality, a complex distribution of shocks around and
inside filaments and sheets may repeatedly shock the infalling
gas, “refreshing” the energy that has been lost to radiative
cooling (c.f. Ryu et al. 2003 at lower redshifts). We therefore
expect the curves in the bottom panel of Figure 2 to decrease
somewhat if radiative cooling is included. In any case, most
of the applications that we consider are concerned with the
total energy processed through the shocked gas, which does
not depend on subsequent cooling mechanisms.

6
3. EFFECTS OF HIGH-REDSHIFT SHOCKS
3.1. Shock-Accelerated Particles at High-Redshifts

We first consider cosmic ray acceleration in highredshift shocks. Particle acceleration is known to be efficient in high-temperature collisionless shocks (Bell 1978;
Blandford & Ostriker 1978). While rare at high redshifts,
such shocks still contain a substantial amount of energy (see
Figure 2). Even if only a small fraction of this energy is transferred to cosmic rays, their energy density can still exceed
the thermal energy density of the unshocked, neutral IGM.
We first show that ionizing shocks are collisionless, following
Waxman & Loeb (2001). We will only consider such shocks
in this section because acceleration is unlikely to be efficient
if most of the thermal energy is carried by neutral particles.
For ionized shocks, we wish to compare the ion-ion collision
frequency,


3

Ωb h 2
1+z
Tsh
s−1 , (10)
νii ≈ 3 × 10−9 δ
104 K
0.02
20
to the growth time for plasma instabilities, νg = C(vs /c)ν pi ,
where the plasma frequency is

1/2 
3/2
Ωb h 2
1+z
ν pi ≈ 10 δ 1/2
s−1 .
(11)
0.02
20
Here C is a factor of order unity that depends on the detailed
plasma physics. The shock is collisionless if νg > νii , or if
−2 
1/2 
3/2

Ωb h 2
1+z
Tsh
−6 1/2
. (12)
C > 3 × 10 δ
104 K
0.02
20
We therefore expect particle acceleration to be efficient
(Blandford & Eichler 1987), though we note that the conditions are sufficiently different from the best studied cases (supernova blastwaves and cluster shocks) that the properties of
the acceleration mechanism are not well-constrained observationally.
We assume that plasma instabilities induce a magnetic field
containing a fraction ξB of the thermal energy in equipartition. In such a situation, particles are accelerated to high energies by scattering off fluctuations in the magnetic field (Bell
1978; Blandford & Ostriker 1978). The acceleration time is
tacc ∼ rL c/v2s , where rL is the Larmor radius of the particle. The maximum Lorentz factor γmax is fixed by the condition tacc ∼ tIC , where tIC is the inverse Compton (IC) cooling time of the particle (the dominant cooling mechanism at
high redshifts). The requirement is (Loeb & Waxman 2000;
Keshet et al. 2003)

1/4  1/4 
1/4
ξB
δ
Ωb h 2
3
γmax ∼ 10
0.01
10
0.02
−5/4 


Tsh
1+z
.
(13)
×
20
104 K
In fact, even those electrons well below this threshold will
lose all their energy to IC emission within a Hubble time so
long as

5/2
10
γ + 1 > 0.43
.
(14)
1+z
We can therefore assume that all of the energy entering the accelerated electron component is transformed into IC radiation

(which is a much more efficient cooling channel than synchrotron losses at high redshifts given that ξB ≤ 1). Assuming a strong shock, the resulting spectrum is flat (Jν ∝ ν −1 ;
Rybicki & Lightman 1979). We estimate the energy density
as in Loeb & Waxman (2000):
νuν ∼

3
1
× ξe × nb kT̄sh ,
2 ln(2γmax )
2

(15)

where T̄sh mass-averaged temperature of the IGM and ξe
is the fraction of thermal energy behind the shock that is
used to accelerate the electrons. The factor 1/2 enters because each decade in electron Lorentz factor corresponds to
two decades in photon frequency. Note that T̄sh should include only those shocks that accelerate electrons (i.e., those
with Tsh > 104 K). We show this quantity as the dotted line
in the bottom panel of Figure 2. Note that, by z ∼ 20,
most of the thermal energy is contained in such shocks. At
the emission redshift, the IC spectrum will extend between
2
(εCMB, γmax
εCMB ) ≈ (10−3 , 103 ) × (1 + z) eV. The background
flux is then Jν = c/4π × uν :


3

Ωb h 2
1+z
ξe
IC
10−4
Jν,21
∼ ln(2γmax
/1000)
0.05
0.023
20

 
T̄sh
να
×
,
(16)
100 K
ν
where Jν,21 = Jν /(10−21 erg s−1 cm−2 Hz−1 sr−1 ) and να is the
frequency of the hydrogen Lyα transition.
We thus find that particle acceleration at large-scale structure shocks creates a diffuse radiation background with a flat
spectrum ranging from radio to soft X-ray energies. Interestingly, such particles may be the first source of high energy
(& 1 eV) radiation in the universe after cosmological recombination. We expect particle acceleration to begin once the
first structures with Tsh & 104 K turn around. This occurs well
before z ∼ 30 (albeit only rarely). In contrast, simulations
show that the first stars form at z ∼ 20–30 (Abel et al. 2002;
Bromm et al. 2002); this is both because the star-forming regions must have fully collapsed and because subsequent cooling is regulated by H2 formation and is quite slow. We consider some of the consequences of this radiation background
in the next section.
In addition to electrons, shocks will deposit a fraction ξ p &
ξe of their energy in cosmic ray protons. Such protons do
not cool through IC radiation; in fact, they become an important pressure component of the shock. This component may
actually have a higher energy density than the diffuse IGM
(averaged over the entire universe):


2

T̄sh
20
ξp
uCR
.
(17)
∼
uIGM
0.1
100 K
1+z
Note that the shocks continue to accelerate protons until the
proton Larmor radii exceed the shock thickness. We therefore
expect the high energy tail of the distribution (which contains
a substantial fraction of the total energy for a strong shock, see
equation [15]) to escape into the diffuse IGM and fill out the
voids uniformly. However, the short diffusion time of the relativistic ions in the unmagnetized IGM implies that their pressure has a weak effect on the assembly of gas during galaxy
formation.
3.2. Diffuse Radiation

7
One way for the thermal shock energy to be transformed
into photons is through IC emission by accelerated electrons,
as described in the previous section. Another is direct radiative cooling. Figure 2 shows that the thermal energy budget
of the IGM is dominated by shocked regions before reionization. We therefore expect the background radiation field from
cooling gas to be dominated by shocked regions as well (provided that the cooling time is short in these regions, which
is true so long as Tsh & 104 K). Cooling occurs principally
through IC emission, line transitions, and free-free emission.
For the moderately overdense regions with T ∼ 104 –105 K
in which we are most interested, line cooling typically dominates. IC emission from thermal electrons produces extremely
low-energy photons, so we will not consider it further here.
Most of the cooling occurs through hydrogen and helium
line emission, which the background spectrum at E < 13.6 eV
. The flux at a given frequency ν is the sum of fluxes from
those lines that redshift to ν at the appropriate cosmic time,
after adjusting for radiative transfer in the IGM (Haiman et al.
1997). We can roughly estimate the background flux by
c
3
2
× fline knb T̄sh ×
(18)
4π
2
3(1 + z)ν
 
2

να
1+z
T̄sh
−3
,
∼ 2 × 10 fline
100 K
ν
20

line
Jν,21
∼

where fline is the fraction of the thermal energy lost to this line
and again T̄sh should only include ionizing shocks. Note that
T̄sh should actually be evaluated at the z′ > z appropriate to the
specified frequency. For example, to evaluate the contribution
to Jν (να ) at a redshift z from Lyβ emission, we would set
1 + z′ = (νβ )/(να ) × (1 + z).
Next we can estimate the spectrum of free-free radiation as
follows. First we approximate the bremsstrahlung emissivity n2e ενf f as flat below a cutoff freqency given by hνc ∼ kT .
Thus the energy density at a particular frequency is simply
proportional to the amount of gas that has been shock-heated
above the corresponding temperature. Each parcel of shocked
gas radiates over its cooling time (where we must include all
emission mechanisms). We find
3
εf f
c
× nb kT fsh (> T ) × ν
(19)
4π 2
ε(T )

1/2  −23

T
10 erg s−1 cm3
∼ fsh (> T )
105 K
ε(T )




3
1+z
Ωb h 2
,
×
0.023
20

ff
Jν,21
∼

where ε(T ) is the cooling function (including all processes)
and fsh (> T ) is the fraction of gas that has been shock-heated
to kT > hν. In the first line, the second factor is the thermal energy in the shocks warm enough to to emit at the relevant frequency, while the third factor is the fraction of energy lost to free-free emission at the appropriate frequency.
(We have assumed here that the cooling time is smaller than
the Hubble time; if not, the flux decreases by the appropriate factor.) The universe is essentially transparent to photons with ν < να (corresponding to a temperature threshold
Tsh & 105 K), while above this threshold the radiation interacts with the IGM gas. We show fsh (> 105 K) as the lower
dotted curve in Figure 2: such shocks are extremely rare until
z ∼ 10. We see that IC emission from accelerated particles
will dominate the high-energy background radiation field at

X-ray energies, but the free-free emission may be significant
at UV energies for z . 15.
While these estimates are quite rough, it is clear that (neglecting emission from protogalaxies) the radiation spectrum
from a few eV to the ionization threshold of hydrogen will
be dominated by free-free line emission from cooling objects,
with a higher energy tail due to IC emission from accelerated
electrons. This diffuse background may have dynamical effects on structure formation. We list several of these below.
• Ionizing background: We can estimate the ionization
fraction due to the IC background as xe ∼ fi uIC /(nbEi ),
where fi is the fraction of the radiation background that
goes into ionizations, Ei is the mean energy lost per
ionization, and uIC = ξe × (3/2)nbkT̄sh is the total energy density in the radiation field. Note that fi . 1/2
accounts for both those photons below the ionization
threshold and the fraction of energy in high-energy photons that goes into heating rather than ionization. The
resulting electron fraction is



ξe
fi
−4
xe ∼ 3 × 10
0.5
0.05



T̄sh
13.6 eV
.
(20)
×
Ei
103 K
The residual electron fraction from cosmological recombination is xe ∼ 2 × 10−4 with our assumed cosmological parameters. We thus find that ionization from
IC emission could only become important at z . 15 and
even then only if star formation is quite inefficient and
hence subdominant. On the other hand, a significant
fraction of the IC photons have keV energies, and these
are able to propagate much farther than lower-energy
stellar ionizing photons.
• X-ray heating: An additional effect of the high energy
photons is to heat the diffuse IGM gas. We can estimate
the resulting temperature by TX ∼ fh ξe T̄sh , where fh is
the fraction of IC energy that goes into heating the gas.
Comparing to the temperature of the gas TIGM (without
additional heating, see §2.2 above), we find



TX
ξe
fh
∼ 10
TIGM
0.5
0.05


−2
T̄sh
1+z
×
.
(21)
103 K
10
Note that TX ∼ TCMB at z = 10 with the parameter
choices shown. Even though only a small fraction of the
shock energy goes into particle acceleration, the diffuse
IGM gas is so cold that the heat input can be significant,
even at z ∼ 20. The temperature of the IGM ultimately
determines the minimum mass of halos that can form
and is potentially measurable with the 21 cm transition
of neutral hydrogen (see §4.2 below).
• Effects on H2 formation: Without metals, cooling
to the low temperatures relevant for star formation
is controlled by H2 (Abel et al. 2002; Bromm et al.
2002; Barkana & Loeb 2001). Radiative feedback can
be significant in the formation of molecular hydrogen; ultraviolet photons in the Lyman-Werner band
(11.26–13.6 eV) can dissociate H2 (Haiman et al. 1997;
Machacek et al. 2001), while X-rays may catalyze its

8
formation by increasing the density of free electrons
(Haiman et al. 2000), although this effect remains controversial (Machacek et al. 2003; Oh & Haiman 2003).
Photodissociation of H2 becomes important when J21 &
10−3 in the UV band; we expect that this could become significant at z ∼ 20 in our model [see equation
(18). The IC component has J21 ∼ 10−6 (keV/E), sufficiently far below the UV flux that photodissociation
should dominate (Haiman et al. 2000).
• Wouthuysen-Field Effect: There has been much interest recently in observing neutral gas at high-redshifts
through the 21 cm spin-flip transition of H I (see §4.2
below). For this to be possible, the spin temperature TS of the hyperfine transition must decouple from
TCMB . In the diffuse IGM, decoupling occurs through
the Wouthuysen-Field effect (Wouthuysen 1952; Field
1958). In this process a hydrogen atom absorbs and
re-emits a Lyα photon; the selection rules allow mixing of the two hyperfine states during this process.
The Wouthuysen-Field effect becomes significant when
Jν,21 (να ) & 1 (Madau et al. 1997). This requires T̄sh &
104 K in equation (18), which does not occur until
z . 8. We therefore find that, in our model, radiation from shocks cannot decouple TS and TCMB . Stellar radiation is required in order to observe the diffuse
gas through the 21 cm transition (see Ciardi & Madau
2003; Chen & Miralda-Escudé 2003).
Of course, both IC and cooling radiation come from discrete sources and are not truly diffuse backgrounds. This is especially true at high redshifts, where shocks with Tsh > 104 K
are quite rare. We therefore expect the above effects to be
significantly larger near to the shocks themselves. Ionization and feedback effects on H2 would be considerably larger
in these regions, which is especially important because both
shocks and collapsing structures preferentially form in the
most highly biased regions. In principle, the cooling radiation
from individual shocks could be imaged. Unfortunately, while
the luminosities are large, the sources are quite extended and
the surface brightness is extremely small. Even the James
Webb Space Telescope would require hundreds of hours of integration to see an individual system at z > 10.
3.3. Gas Stripping from Minihalos
At low and moderate redshifts, large-scale structure shocks
have complex morphologies (Ryu et al. 2003) that surround
and interpenetrate sheets and filaments. Nearly all of the gas
that accretes smoothly onto the structures is shocked; however, it is less clear whether gas that has cooled onto galaxies
or even galaxy groups is affected by the shocks. The galactic interstellar medium is much denser than the surrounding
IGM, which dramatically decreases the strength of the accretion shocks felt by the interstellar medium. Moreover, these
objects have substantial magnetic fields that may deflect gas
in the external medium around the object, rather than allowing
it to collide and shock the interstellar medium of the galaxy.
However, these mechanisms do not apply to gas in “minihalos” at high redshifts. Such objects have virial temperatures Tvir < 104 K, placing them below the threshold to excite atomic hydrogen transitions. In the absence of molecular hydrogen, they are therefore unable to cool efficiently
and cannot collapse after virialization, remaining as moderately overdense (δ ∼ 200) gaseous halos in the IGM (see

Barkana & Loeb 2001 and references therein). In terms of
their internal structure, such halos are thus more similar to
local galaxy clusters than to galaxies, except that they likely
have negligible magnetic fields and no gas substructure.
Thus, these halos have little protection from the ram pressure of the surrounding medium. The minihalo gas will
then be stripped to a radius R determined by the condition
2
ρsh v2sh = ρmh (R)σmh
, where ρsh = δsh ρ̄ is the mean density in
the shocked region, ρmh (R) = δmh (R)ρ̄ is the density at a given
point within the minihalo, and σmh is the velocity dispersion
of the minihalo. The condition is approximately


γ Tsh
δsh .
(22)
δmh (R) ≈
2η Tvir
Given a density profile for the minihalo gas, this prescription
allows us to compute the fraction of minihalo gas that is lost
as it travels through large-scale structure shocks. We consider
two possible density profiles: a singular isothermal sphere
(SIS) and isothermal gas inside of a dark matter halo with
the structure found by Navarro et al. (1997, hereafter NFW).
We parameterize our results in terms of fret , the fraction of the
initial minihalo gas mass retained by the minihalo after ram
pressure is taken into account. For an SIS, the criterion is particularly simple: fret = R/rvir . For isothermal gas in an NFW
halo,
R R/rvir
du u2 (1 + cu)g(c)/u
fret (R) = 0R 1
,
(23)
du u2 (1 + cu)g(c)/u
0
where

g(c) =

2
ln(1 + c) − c/(1 + c)

(24)

and c is the concentration parameter of the minihalo. We
choose c from the fit to simulations given by Bullock et al.
(2001).
Figure 5 shows the effects on individual halos. The bottom panel shows the probability that a halo at z = 10 is contained within a shock as a function of Tsh /Tvir . The solid,
long-dashed, short-dashed, and dotted curves assume Tvir =
170, 1080, 5030, and 105 K, respectively. These correspond
to Mh = 6 × 104 , 106 , 107 , and 109 M⊙ . The smallest of the
these masses is the filter mass at z = 10 while the largest is
above the cooling threshold and is included only for illustrative purposes. We see that the probability for a halo to sit
inside a strong shock is extremely sensitive to its mass. A
substantial fraction of halos below the nonlinear mass scale
are embedded in strong shocks, but very few halos above that
scale are associated with larger shocks because such structures are increasingly rare. The top panel shows the fraction
of mass retained in a halo as a function of Tsh /Tvir . The solid
line assumes the gas has an SIS distribution ( fret is then independent of halo mass when expressed as a function of Tsh /Tvir )
and the dot-dashed lines assume that the gas is isothermal in
an NFW halo. The concentration parameters in this plot are
for Tvir = 170 and 105 K (left and right curves); this is the only
aspect in which the halo mass enters into this parameterization. Stripping sets in when the shock temperature is a few
times the virial temperature of the minihalo. The SIS model
is more concentrated and is therefore more stable to mass loss.
Note that the NFW model has a finite density core, so the entire minihalo can be stripped. Comparing the two panels, we
see that a negligible fraction of mass would be lost from halos
near to the minihalo mass threshold, but a large fraction could
be lost from smaller halos.

9

F IG . 5.— Bottom panel: The probability that a halo at z = 10 is contained
within a shock of a given strength. The solid, long-dashed, short-dashed, and
dotted lines are for halos with Tvir = 170, 1080, 5030, and 105 K. Top panel:
The fraction of mass retained in a halo after ram-pressure stripping. The solid
line assumes the gas has an SIS distribution and the dot-dashed lines assume
that the gas is isothermal in an NFW halo. In the latter case, the left and right
curves assume concentration parameters appropriate for halos with Tvir = 170
and 105 K, respectively.

Figure 6 shows the global effects of shock disruption. We
show the fraction of mass in collapsed objects (including both
minihalos and halos that are able to cool) that remains after
ram pressure stripping is included. The solid line assumes
that minihalos have SIS density profiles while the dashed line
assumes they are isothermal gas in an NFW potential. The
two density profiles give very similar results because they differ substantially only in the core (which rarely gets stripped).
We see that the global effects of stripping are fairly small:
only . 5% of the gas is stripped at z & 20 while approximately 10% of the gas is stripped at z ∼ 10. The importance
of stripping increases with cosmic time because, as the nonlinear mass scale increases, regions with stronger and stronger
shocks form and a larger fraction of minihalos are contained
in such regions. Note that stripping is concentrated in the most
highly biased regions of the universe (where strong shocks
can form). This is also where a large fraction of ionizing
sources reside; we would therefore expect minihalos to be less
important around such sources than previous estimates have
assumed (e.g., Barkana & Loeb 2002; Shapiro et al. 2003).
These estimates also assume that minihalo gas is stripped only
after the minihalo has formed. In reality, many minihalos will
enter large-scale structure shocks during their own collapse.
Criterion (22) suggests that stripping is more efficient if the
initial density is smaller.
Ram pressure is not the only way in which shocks can strip
minihalos. As they fall into these structures, the minihalo gas
will pass through the shock. If the shock adds sufficient entropy to the gas, it can escape the minihalo (Oh & Haiman
2003). The stripping efficiency is then determined by the ratio of the shock speed in the minihalo [which is proportional
to ρ(R)−1/2 ] to the sound speed. We find that this mechanism is slighly less efficient than ram pressure stripping, so
the two mechanisms together will likely increase the amount
of stripped gas over that shown in Figure 6 by a small fac-

F IG . 6.— Fraction of gas in collapsed objects that is retained after ram
pressure stripping. The solid curve assumes the minihalo profile is an SIS,
while the dashed curve assumes isothermal gas in an NFW potential.

tor. Calibration of the precise level of these effects must await
numerical simulations that include a careful treatment of the
shock physics as well as broad enough dymanic range to resolve minihalos while also encompassing a large, representative cosmological volume.
Finally, note that shocks may trigger star formation in minihalos. If the postshock temperature Tsh & 104 K, the gas
will be able to cool through both line radiation and inverseCompton processes. In this case, gas would remain bound
to the minihalo and, if cooling is sufficiently fast, some gas
could even collapse to high enough densities to form stars
(Mackey et al. 2003; Cen 2003). In reality, the dense central
regions of the minihalos may collapse to form stars while the
outer layers are stripped by the shock. Disentangling these
two effects requires hydrodynamic simulations of the shocking process. Triggered star formation is likely to be less efficient in large-scale structure shocks than in supernova blastwaves because the characteristic velocities are smaller.
4. OBSERVATIONAL SIGNATURES OF HIGH-REDSHIFT SHOCKS
4.1. Optical Depth to the CMB

One way to observe the effects of gravitational heating
is through its effects on the CMB. Large-scale shocks with
T & 104 K will ionize gas that passes through them. CMB
photons will scatter off the resulting free electrons, smoothing
out the anisotropies. The cumulative optical depth to electron
scattering τes between redshifts zl and zh is
Z zh
dt
(25)
dzσT ne (z)c ,
τes =
dz
zl
where σT is the Thomson scattering cross section. We compute the optical depth by assuming that all gas associated with
shocks of T > 104 K at a given redshift is ionized. The result
is shown in the top panel of Figure 7; τes < 1% and is unlikely
to contribute substantially to the measured optical depth, particularly if reionization occurs at high redshift. By neglecting
recombination of the gas, we actually provide an upper limit
to the optical depth due to IGM shocks. Recombination will
be significant within the overdense shocked regions, unless

10

F IG . 7.— Top panel: The optical depth to electron scattering τes in our
model, assuming that all gas associated with bound objects and/or turnaround
shocks of T > 104 K remains ionized. Bottom panel: The mean 21 cm brightness temperature decrement δTb of the IGM relative to the CMB. The dotted
curve neglects all heat sources (including gravity). The dot-dashed curve includes virial shocks. The solid and long-dashed curves include heating at
turnaround shocks; the latter assumes that all gas in shocks with T > 104 K
remains ionized and is almost hidden by the solid curve. The short-dashed
curve also includes X-ray heating through the IC background from shockaccelerated electrons.

the gas is shocked many times as it falls into the potential
well of an object.
4.2. 21 cm Radiation
Another way to identify shocks is through their effect on
the global temperature distribution of the IGM, which can be
measured with the 21 cm transition. The brightness temperature increment of the 21 cm transition from neutral gas relative
to the CMB is (Field 1958; Madau et al. 1997)

1/2

0.3 1 + z
Ωb h 2
δTb = 26 mK
0.023
Ωm 10
Z
d f TS − TCMB
× dTS
,
(26)
dTS
TS

where TS is the spin temperature of the hydrogen and the integral extends over all neutral gas. Note that if TS ≫ TCMB , the
signal saturates in emission, but if TS ≪ TCMB the magnitude
of the absorption increases like TS−1 .
The spin temperature remains locked to the CMB temperature unless (1) the background Lyα photon field is large
enough for the Wouthuysen-Field mechanism to become efficient (see §3.2 above) or (2) the number density of hydrogen is large enough for collisions to decouple the two (Field
1958). If these processes operate,
TS =

TCMB + yα Tα + yc TK
,
1 + yα + yc

(27)

where Tα is the Lyα color temperature (Tα = TK under a wide
variety of conditions; Field 1959) and TK is the kinetic temperature of the gas. The coupling constant yα = P10 T⋆ /(A10 Tα ),
where P10 = 1.3 × 10−12 Jν,21 (να ) is the indirect de-excitation
rate of the triplet level due to the absorption of a Lyα photon followed by decay to the singlet level, T⋆ = 0.068 K is

the excitation temperature of the hyperfine level, and A10 =
2.85 × 10−15 s−1 is the spontaneous emission coefficient of the
transition. The coupling from collisions is yc = C10 T⋆ /(A10 Tα ),
where C10 is the collisional de-excitation rate of the triplet
hyperfine level and has been calculated for TK < 103 K by
Allison & Dalgarno (1969) (we assume C10 ∝ TK0.33 for higher
temperatures).
We first assume that TS = TK throughout the universe (i.e.,
there is a strong Lyα background). We showed in §3.2 that
this requires stellar (or quasar) radiation, because the background from shocks themselves is insufficient. In the absence
of heat sources, the IGM will appear as a smooth absorption
feature against the CMB [d f /dTS = δ(T − TIGM )]. The signal is
shown by the dotted curve in the bottom panel of Figure 7; we
see |δTb | & 100 mK, decreasing rapidly as redshift decreases
because TK ∝ (1 + z)2. This signal is sufficiently strong to be
easily observable by the next generation of low-frequency radio telescopes. However, structure formation will remove gas
from the cold IGM, decreasing the overall absorption signal.
First, we must remove gas that is attached to bound objects.
In this case the integral in equation (26) extends over the mass
function of collapsed objects dn/dM. The result is shown in
Figure 7 as the dot-dashed line. We see that δTb changes by
only a small amount for z & 15.
Next, we include (in addition to collapsed objects) gas that
has been shock-heated by large-scale structure. This is shown
by the solid line in Figure 7, assuming that all gas remains
neutral. (The long-dashed line shows the signal if gas associated with T > 104 K shocks remains ionized and does not
emit; it is nearly completely obscured by the solid curve.)
Because fsh ≫ fcoll at high redshifts, the absorption signal
flattens out at much higher redshifts; even at z = 20, |δTb | is
smaller by about 30 mK. In principle, shock-heating at high
redshifts could therefore be detected by its effects on the radio
spectrum. However, other heat sources, such as X-rays from
the IC background generated by particles accelerated at the
shocks (see §3.2) or from supernovae or quasars, will increase
the temperature of the low-density IGM and may cause significant contamination with this signal (Chen & Miralda-Escudé
2003). For example, the short-dashed line shows the signal
assuming the heat input from equation (21), which includes
IC emission from shock-accelerated electrons. Even this relatively gentle heating rapidly decreases the amount of absorption, and it actually turns into emission by z ∼ 13. We would
therefore require an early stellar Lyα background (unaccompanied by X-ray heating) for significant absorption to be possible. Note that the treatment of weak shocks has a substantial
effect on this estimate, so our model may not be quantitatively
accurate. Gnedin & Shaver (2003) have recently simulated
this absorption era; they find that shock heating decreases
|δTb | by an even larger amount than we estimate. This indicates that weak shocks preceding turnaround may heat the
diffuse IGM by a small amount before reionization and that
we underestimate their effects (unlike at moderate redshifts).
The above discussion of the globally-averaged signal ignores the fact that the temperature and density distributions
are highly inhomogeneous. The absorption and emission signal therefore fluctuates across the sky, and one can also search
for these fluctuations (Scott & Rees 1990; Madau et al. 1997;
Zaldarriaga et al. 2003; Loeb & Zaldarriagga 2003). Because
the emission signal is independent of TS for TS ≫ TCMB , it
essentially depends only on the mass of gas in a given volume that emits. Let us now consider a sufficiently early epoch

11
when the Lyα background is small, so that TS = TCMB in the
diffuse IGM. Iliev et al. (2002) have shown that, because collisional coupling is still effective in dense gas, minihalos provide a fluctuating emission signal that may be observable on
large scales (see also Iliev et al. 2003). Here we point out that,
because the shocked phase contains so much more mass than
minihalos, the emission signal is probably much larger than
Iliev et al. (2002) have estimated.
In the case of minihalos, the density is so large that yc ≫ 1
throughout the halo. Thus TS = TK is a good approximation
in these systems. In shocks, however, the densities are much
smaller and not all of the gas may have TS > TCMB . Given z
and TK , we first define δ21 , the overdensity for which yc = 1
and above which collisional coupling becomes efficient. Note
that (at fixed temperature) δ21 increases as z decreases because
the mean density also decreases. We then let hδ21 i be the critical overdensity for collisional coupling to be effective, averaged over the temperature distribution of the shocked gas:
Z
df
δ21 (z, TK )
(28)
hδ21 (z)i = dTK
dTK
The resulting values are shown by the solid line in the top
panel of Figure 8 for our shock model. The dotted line shows
the overdensity at turnaround in the spherical model; at z &
25, all shocked gas emits strongly. Note that hδ21 i ≪ 200 for
all redshifts shown.
We wish to find the fraction of collapsing gas that has
δ > hδ21 i. In the spherical collapse model, the overdensity
at turnaround is δta = 5.55 and increases monotonically with
time until virialization (e.g. Peebles 1980). We can estimate
the relevant fraction with a slight extension of our model: we
assume that all gas collapses spherically, so that a parcel of
gas with a given density at z has a well-defined turnaround
redshift zta . The fraction of gas with δ > hδ21 i at z is then
simply the fraction of gas that has passed through turnaround
shocks by zta . Note that our model is only approximate because we do not follow (δ, TS ) of individual gas elements; we
actually underestimate the fraction of gas with TS > TK because the hottest shocks, associated with the most massive
objects, have smaller critical densities and hence may have
collapsed later on. The bottom panel of Figure 8 compares
the fraction of the IGM gas that is able to emit 21 cm radiation in our shock model (solid line) with the fraction of
gas in minihalos (dashed line). The peak at z ∼ 25 occurs
because hδ21 i < δta at higher redshifts, so that all shocked
gas was able to emit. At z & 15, the former is much larger
than the amount of mass in minihalos. Thus, we see explicitly that the true emission signal will be significantly larger
than that calculated just from minihalos. Weak shocks occurring before turnaround (as appear to exist in the simulations of
Gnedin & Shaver 2003) would further amplify the fluctuation
signal.3
5. DISCUSSION

In this paper, we have presented a model for the temperature
distribution of IGM gas that takes into account shocks during
structure formation. We use a simple extension of the PressSchechter model that associates shocks with a fixed density
contrast, and we assume that the shock temperature is determined by the infall velocity at the shock time. Our model
3 Note that the bias amplification for shocked gas is somewhat smaller than
that for minihalos, because it is associated with smaller density peaks. However, on the large scales accessible to the next generation of radio telescopes,
the difference should not be large.

F IG . 8.— Top panel: The critical density hδ21 i for coupling between
the spin and kinetic temperatures of H I, averaged over the temperature of
the shocked phase. The dotted line shows δ = 5.55, the nominal density at
turnaround. Bottom panel: The fraction of gas able to emit. The solid line is
for the shocked phase (see text); the dashed line includes only the collapsed
objects.

therefore describes moderately overdense gas in the process
of collapsing. We find that associating shocks with turnaround
adequately describes the temperature distribution of shocked
gas at z = 0 found by Davé et al. (2001). The agreement with
simulations is not good for weak shocks (which dominate at
z ∼ 2–3), but we are primarily concerned with strong shocks.
We then used our formalism to consider shocks at higher redshifts. We found that large-scale structure (rather than virialization) shocks dominate the thermal energy content of the
IGM for most of the period before reionization. As a result,
shocks can have several interesting consequences for structure formation. These include stripping gas from ∼ 10% of
all minihalos, depositing a substantial fraction of their energy
in cosmic rays, and creating a radiation background (due to
cooling radiation and inverse Compton emission by accelerated electrons) that extends to high energies. We have argued
that these shocks can be observed through their effects (both
directly and indirectly) on redshifted 21 cm fluctuations. The
warm, moderately overdense shocks will emit 21 cm radiation and may be visible as a fluctuating background. The
fluctuations will be larger than those from collapsed objects
because significantly more gas is contained in the shocked
phase. Moreover, the X-ray background produced by shockaccelerated electrons significantly affects the temperature of
gas in the low-density IGM, decreasing (or even eliminating)
any absorption signal.
Our formalism involves several important simplifications.
First, we assume that infalling gas is shocked only twice: once
at turnaround and once at virialization. We have also assumed
pure spherical collapse. This is clearly only an approximation; Keshet et al. (2003) and Ryu et al. (2003) have shown
that the distribution of shocks is much more complicated, with
strong shocks bounding filaments and sheets with a network
of weaker shocks surrounding virialized objects. The nonspherical nature of collapse is also critical, because it affects
both the fraction of gas that is shocked (through the density
threshold required before significant collapse occurs) and the

12
strength of the resulting shocks (because the infall velocities
also change).
Another caveat is that our model associates shocks with
turnaround. On the one hand, we seem to overestimate the
fraction of gas that is weakly shocked at moderate redshifts.
We have argued that this is because gas flows are only moderately supersonic in such shocks. When infall velocities are
slow, it is plausible that shocks can only form later in the
collapse process. On the other hand, if gas travels supersonically during the early stages of infall, asymmetries in the
flow may cause parcels of gas to collide and shock well before turnaround. This is particularly important before reionization, when the IGM gas temperature is ∼ 10 K. In this
regime, supersonic flow occurs well before turnaround and
a much larger fraction of the IGM may be weakly shocked.
However, the thermal energy of the shocks is dominated by
the largest objects if z . 20 (compare the solid and dotted
curves in Figure 2). The strong shocks at or after turnaround
therefore probably contain most of the energy. Furthermore,
most of the effects that we consider at high redshifts (including cooling radiation, particle acceleration, and ram pressure
stripping) depend primarily on the characteristics of the strong
shocks that are able to ionized the cold pre-reionization IGM.
We therefore expect our conclusions to be robust against uncertainties in the treatment of weak shocks. Weak shocks will,
however, substantially increase the 21 cm signal during the
early phases of structure formation (compare our Figure 7 and
Figure 2 of Gnedin & Shaver 2003).
Finally, we have assumed that the Press & Schechter
(1974) formalism provides a good fit to the mass function.
Sheth & Tormen (1999) and Jenkins et al. (2001) have shown
that a modified version of the formalism incorporating ellipsoidal collapse provides a better fit to many simulations

(but see Jang-Condell & Hernquist 2001). We have chosen
not to use these modifications because we require the conditional mass functions to remove mass attached to collapsed
objects. Conditional functions can be written analytically in
the standard Press-Schechter approach (Lacey & Cole 1993).
The Sheth-Tormen approach, however, is based on a “moving barrier” for which conditional mass functions cannot be
solved analytically, although they can be fit to simulation data
(Sheth & Tormen 2002). For our purposes, the major difference between the two approaches is that highly nonlinear objects are more common in the Sheth-Tormen mass function.
We therefore expect high-temperature shocks to be somewhat
more important than our model predicts.
Obviously, the best way to test our model is with highresolution simulations including a careful treatment of shocks.
Such simulations would follow the non-spherical nature of the
collapse directly and can (at least in principle) capture the
shocks at many different stages of collapse. However, note
that the most significant shocks at high redshifts (those that
ionize the infalling gas) are quite rare. Large-volume simulations are required in order to include a representative sample of these rare and highly biased peaks (Barkana & Loeb
2003). Shock-capturing schemes could then be used in these
simulations to predict more accurately the background radiation from accelerated particles, the temperature distribution
and its effects 21 cm signal, and the importance of ram pressure stripping.

S. R. F. thanks S. P. Oh for helpful discussions. This work
was supported in part by NASA grant NAG 5-13292, and by
NSF grants AST-0071019, AST-0204514 (for A.L.).

REFERENCES
Abel, T., Bryan, G. L., & Norman, M. L. 2002, Science, 295, 93
Allison, A. C., & Dalgarno, A. 1969, ApJ, 158, 423
Barkana, R., & Loeb, A. 2001, Phys. Rep., 349, 125
—. 2002, ApJ, 578, 1
—. 2003, ApJ, submitted, (astro-ph/0310338)
Bell, A. R. 1978, MNRAS, 182, 147
Blandford, R., & Eichler, D. 1987, Phys. Rep., 154, 1
Blandford, R. D., & Ostriker, J. P. 1978, ApJ, 221, L29
Bromm, V., Coppi, P. S., & Larson, R. B. 2002, ApJ, 564, 23
Bullock, J. S., et al. 2001, MNRAS, 321, 559
Cen, R. 2003, ApJ, submitted, (astro-ph/0311329)
Cen, R., Miralda-Escude, J., Ostriker, J. P., & Rauch, M. 1994, ApJ, 437, L9
Cen, R., & Ostriker, J. P. 1999, ApJ, 514, 1
Chen, X., & Miralda-Escudé, J. 2003, ApJ, submitted, (astro-ph/0303395)
Ciardi, B., & Madau, P. 2003, ApJ, 596, 1
Davé, R., et al. 2001, ApJ, 552, 473
de Lapparent, V., Geller, M. J., & Huchra, J. P. 1986, ApJ, 302, L1
Dijkstra, M., Haiman, Z., Rees, M. J., & Weinberg, D. H. 2003, ApJ,
submitted, (astro-ph/0308042)
Efstathiou, G. 1992, MNRAS, 256, 43
Field, G. B. 1958, Proc. IRE, 46, 240
—. 1959, ApJ, 129, 551
Gnedin, N. Y., & Hui, L. 1998, MNRAS, 296, 44
Gnedin, N. Y., & Shaver, P. A. 2003, ApJ, submitted, (astro-ph/0312005)
Gunn, J. E., & Gott, J. R. I. 1972, ApJ, 176, 1
Haiman, Z., Abel, T., & Rees, M. J. 2000, ApJ, 534, 11
Haiman, Z., Rees, M. J., & Loeb, A. 1997, ApJ, 476, 458
Hernquist, L., Katz, N., Weinberg, D. H., & Jordi, M. 1996, ApJ, 457, L51
Iliev, I. T., Scannapieco, E., Martel, H., & Shapiro, P. R. 2003, MNRAS, 341,
81
Iliev, I. T., Shapiro, P. R., Ferrara, A., & Martel, H. 2002, ApJ, 572, L123
Jang-Condell, H., & Hernquist, L. 2001, ApJ, 548, 68
Jenkins, A., et al. 2001, MNRAS, 321, 372
Keshet, U., Waxman, E., Loeb, A., Springel, V., & Hernquist, L. 2003, ApJ,
585, 128
Lacey, C., & Cole, S. 1993, MNRAS, 262, 627

Loeb, A., & Waxman, E. 2000, Nature, 405, 156
Loeb, A., & Zaldarriagga, M. 2003, Phys. Rev. Lett., submitted,
(astro-ph/0312134)
Machacek, M. E., Bryan, G. L., & Abel, T. 2001, ApJ, 548, 509
—. 2003, MNRAS, 338, 273
Mackey, J., Bromm, V., & Hernquist, L. 2003, ApJ, 586, 1
Madau, P., Meiksin, A., & Rees, M. J. 1997, ApJ, 475, 429
Nath, B. B., & Trentham, N. 1997, MNRAS, 291, 505
Navarro, J. F., Frenk, C. S., & White, S. D. M. 1997, ApJ, 490, 493 (NFW)
Navarro, J. F., & Steinmetz, M. 1997, ApJ, 478, 13
Oh, S. P., & Haiman, Z. 2003, MNRAS, submitted, (astro-ph/0307135)
Peebles, P. J. E. 1980, The Large-Scale Structure of the Universe (Princeton:
Princeton University Press)
—. 1993, Principles of Physical Cosmology (Princeton: Princeton University
Press)
Press, W. H., & Schechter, P. 1974, ApJ, 187, 425
Quilis, V., Moore, B., & Bower, R. 2000, Science, 288, 1617
Rybicki, G. B., & Lightman, A. P. 1979, Radiative Processes in Astrophysics
(New York: Wiley)
Ryu, D., Kang, H., Hallman, E., & Jones, T. W. 2003, ApJ, 593, 599
Scott, D., & Rees, M. J. 1990, MNRAS, 247, 510
Shapiro, P. R., Iliev, I. T., & Raga, A. C. 2003, MNRAS, submitted,
(astro-ph/0307266)
Sheth, R. K., & Tormen, G. 1999, MNRAS, 308, 119
—. 2002, MNRAS, 329, 61
Spergel, D. N., et al. 2003, ApJS, 148, 175
Theuns, T., et al. 1998, MNRAS, 301, 478
Thoul, A. A., & Weinberg, D. H. 1995, ApJ, 442, 480
Waxman, E., & Loeb, A. 2001, Physical Review Letters, 87, 71101
Wouthuysen, S. A. 1952, AJ, 57, 31
Zaldarriaga, M., Furlanetto, S. R., & Hernquist, L. 2003, ApJ, submitted,
(astro-ph/0311514)
Zel’Dovich, Y. B. 1970, A&A, 5, 84

