MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

Preprint 4 October 2023

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style file v3.0

Signatures of Cosmic Ray Heating in 21-cm Observables
T. Gessey-Jones,1,2★ A. Fialkov,2,3 E. de Lera Acedo,1,2 W. J. Handley,1,2 and R. Barkana4,5,6
1 Astrophysics Group, Cavendish Laboratory, J. J. Thomson Avenue, Cambridge, CB3 0HE, UK
2 Kavli Institute for Cosmology, Madingley Road, Cambridge, CB3 0HA, UK
3 Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge, CB3 0HA, UK
4 School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel
5 Institute for Advanced Study, 1 Einstein Drive, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA

arXiv:2304.07201v2 [astro-ph.CO] 3 Oct 2023

6 Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of California, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ

ABSTRACT

Cosmic rays generated by supernovae carry away a significant portion of the lifetime energy emission of their parent star, making
them a plausible mechanism for heating the early universe intergalactic medium (IGM). Following a review of the existing
literature on cosmic ray heating, we develop a flexible model of this heating mechanism for use in 3D semi-numerical 21-cm
signal simulations and conduct the first investigations of the signatures it imprints on the 21-cm power spectrum and tomographic
maps. We find that cosmic ray heating of the IGM is short-ranged, leading to heating clustered around star-forming sites, and
a sharp contrast between heated regions of 21-cm emission and unheated regions of absorption. This contrast results in greater
small-scale power for cosmic ray heated scenarios compared to what is found for X-ray heating, thus suggesting a way to test the
nature of IGM heating with future 21-cm observations. Finally, we find an unexpectedly rich thermal history in models where
cosmic rays can only escape efficiently from low-mass halos, such as in scenarios where these energetic particles originate from
population III star supernovae remnants. The interplay of heating and the Lyman-Werner feedback in these models can produce
a local peak in the IGM kinetic temperature and, for a limited parameter range, a flattened absorption trough in the global 21-cm
signal.
Key words: cosmic rays – early Universe – dark ages, reionization, first stars – cosmology: theory

1 INTRODUCTION
Observations of supernova remnants (SNRs) by the Fermi satellite (Ackermann et al. 2013) strongly support the theory that supernovae are a source of cosmic rays. These high-energy charged
particles are estimated to carry away 10 to 50 per cent of the kinetic
energy of the supernova shock (Drury et al. 1989; Berezinskii et al.
1990; Caprioli & Spitkovsky 2014; Sazonov & Sunyaev 2015) and
so represent a substantial portion of the lifetime energy output of
massive stars.
Due to the large amount of energy imparted into cosmic rays and
the important role played by cosmic rays in determining the thermal
and ionization state of the interstellar medium (ISM, Schlickeiser
2002), previous authors (Ginzburg & Ozernoi 1966; Nath & Biermann 1993; Sazonov & Sunyaev 2015; Leite et al. 2017; Jana &
Nath 2018; Jana et al. 2019; Bera et al. 2023) have considered them
as a potential mechanism for heating and ionizing the neutral intergalactic medium (IGM) at early times. For example, Sazonov &
Sunyaev (2015) and Leite et al. (2017) demonstrate that cosmic rays
produced by Population III (Pop III) and Population II (Pop II) star
supernovae may be able to heat the IGM above the cosmic microwave
background (CMB) temperature by redshift 15 and 10 respectively.

★ E-mail: tg400@cam.ac.uk

© 2023 The Authors

However, neither study found cosmic rays contribute more than a few
per cent to the ionization of the IGM.
Any efficient heating of the IGM before reionization is of particular interest in the context of the burgeoning field of 21-cm cosmology (Madau et al. 1997; Furlanetto et al. 2006; Pritchard & Loeb
2012; Barkana 2016; Mesinger 2019). 21-cm cosmology aims to
probe the dark age of the Universe, cosmic dawn, and the epoch of
reionization via the degree of emission or absorption at the 21-cm
spectral line of neutral hydrogen. The strength of this emission or
absorption traces the evolution of the thermal and ionization states
of the IGM providing a way to test the astrophysical properties of the
first stars and galaxies (Yajima & Khochfar 2015; Cohen et al. 2016;
Mirocha et al. 2018; Mebane et al. 2018; Tanaka et al. 2018; Schauer
et al. 2019; Mirocha & Furlanetto 2019; Mebane et al. 2020; Tanaka
& Hasegawa 2021; Muñoz et al. 2022; Gessey-Jones et al. 2022),
and potentially the nature of dark matter (Barkana 2018; Muñoz
et al. 2018; Fraser et al. 2018; Fialkov et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019;
Muñoz et al. 2020; Jones et al. 2021; Hibbard et al. 2022; Barkana
et al. 2023). Optimistically, cosmic ray heating may therefore provide another mechanism by which early stars and galaxies impact the
surrounding IGM, allowing additional information to be extracted
about their properties from the 21-cm signal. Pessimistically, the impacts of cosmic ray heating on the 21-cm signal may be degenerate
with those of other physical processes of interest thereby weakening
possible constraints from a 21-cm signal detection. We leave investi-

2

T. Gessey-Jones et al.

gations of such degeneracies to a future study, as this paper is focused
on the detailed modelling of this heating contribution and providing
some illustrative examples.
An additional motivation to explore the potential contribution of
cosmic rays to the IGM heating is provided by the disputed global
signal detected by the EDGES collaboration (Bowman et al. 2018;
Hills et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2022). It was shown by Jana et al.
(2019) that cosmic ray heating prevents the radio background from
supernovae alone being an explanation for the anomalous depth of the
reported signal, while Bera et al. (2023) argued models with cosmic
ray heating alongside dark matter-baryon interactions could provide
a potential explanation for some features of the best-fit absorption
trough. It is, thus, evident that an understanding of the signatures
of cosmic ray heating in the 21-cm signal may be necessary for the
correct interpretation of the signal.
The aforementioned studies into cosmic ray heating found it to be
dominated by sub-relativistic cosmic ray protons. Due to these particles moving at less than the speed of light, and potentially diffusing
throughout the IGM by scattering from magnetic irregularities, heating from cosmic rays is anticipated to be more clustered around
star-forming sources than alternatives such as X-ray heating (Fialkov
et al. 2014b; Pacucci et al. 2014). Leite et al. (2017) and Yokoyama
& Ohira (2023) both briefly discussed that this clustering of heating
could result in specific features in the 21-cm power spectrum that
would not be present in the case of an IGM heated by X-rays, potentially allowing a cosmic ray heated IGM to be distinguished from
an X-ray heated one; however, no further study of these features was
conducted.
In this paper, we fill this gap in the literature by performing the
first 21-cm signal simulations to model the spatial distribution of
cosmic ray heating. This is achieved by extending an existing seminumerical 21-cm signal simulation (e.g., Visbal et al. 2012; Fialkov
et al. 2014a; Reis et al. 2020) with a parameterized model of cosmic ray heating. By using a semi-numerical simulation, rather than a
globally averaged semi-analytic model like previous studies, we are
able to simulate full 21-cm tomographic maps and thus calculate the
21-cm power spectrum. Hence, allowing for the first quantitative discussions on the impact of cosmic ray heating on these observables,
and on whether or not cosmic ray heating may be distinguishable
from other heating mechanisms of the early IGM. Furthermore, as
the 21-cm signal is not linearly dependent on the IGM gas temperature, spatially resolved simulations may be necessary to produce
accurate predictions of the 21-cm global signal, especially given the
anticipated strongly clustered nature of cosmic ray heating. We are
thus also able to assess the extent to which the globally uniform
heating assumption has biased the conclusions reached by previous
studies. Our approach additionally enables us to investigate the sensitivity of cosmic ray heating to other uncertain aspects of the high
redshift universe such as the star formation history and the strength
of the Lyman-Werner (LW) feedback (Haiman et al. 2000). We hence
also consider how the imprints of cosmic ray heating vary with the
uncertain astrophysical properties of the first stars and galaxies, and
thus verify the robustness of our conclusions.
We begin this paper by reviewing the modelling of cosmic ray
heating in previous studies in section 2, which a reader familiar with
the literature may want to skip in the interest of time. In section 3 we
then recap the theory of the 21-cm signal, outline our semi-numerical
simulation code, and describe our parameterized model of cosmic
ray heating. Using our extended simulations in section 4 we detail our
findings regarding the signatures of cosmic ray heating in various 21cm observables and highlight unique features seen for specific types
of cosmic ray heating scenarios. Finally, in section 5 we conclude
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

with a summary of our results and discuss how they could be more
generally relevant to the interpretation of the 21-cm signal.

2 COSMIC RAY HEATING OF THE IGM
A model of high-redshift cosmic ray heating requires several key
ingredients: a production mechanism of cosmic rays in the early
universe (subsection 2.1); a prescription for how these cosmic rays
reach the IGM (subsection 2.2); channels through which cosmic rays
lose their energy (subsection 2.3); a way to convert this energy loss
into the IGM heat (subsection 2.4); and finally the heating distribution caused by the propagation of cosmic rays through the IGM
(subsection 2.5).
Approaches taken to each one of these modelling steps have differed between previous studies (Nath & Biermann 1993; Stacy &
Bromm 2007; Sazonov & Sunyaev 2015; Leite et al. 2017; Jana &
Nath 2018; Samui et al. 2018; Jana et al. 2019; Bera et al. 2023), due
in part to the uncertainties surrounding cosmic ray astrophysics in
the early universe. Here we briefly review the prior approaches taken
when investigating the impacts of cosmic ray heating on the 21-cm
signal.

2.1 Production of cosmic rays
As a dying massive star undergoes a supernova it injects 1051 to
1053 erg of kinetic energy into ejected material (Woosley & Weaver
1986; Heger & Woosley 2002; Woosley & Heger 2007; Heger &
Woosley 2010; Woosley 2010; Whalen et al. 2013a,b; Chen et al.
2014, 2017). The exact amount of energy is dependent on the type
of supernovae and hence the mass of the star, with core-collapse
supernovae yielding the lower end of the stated energy range and
pair-instability supernovae producing the highest amount of energy.
The expelled high-velocity material travels outwards from the star,
eventually reaching the boundary of the photoevaporated region surrounding the star. As the high-velocity material meets this denser
medium a shock forms. This shock then continues to expand outwards as a supernovae remnant (SNR), gradually losing its energy
until it finally dissipates.
A charged particle in the SNR can diffuse back and forth across
the shock gaining energy each time, a process referred to as diffusive
shock acceleration (DSA, Bell 1978a,b; Schlickeiser 2002; Schure
et al. 2012). If a charged particle gains sufficient energy it can then escape the supernovae shock upstream (Ohira & Murase 2019). Lower
energy charged particles remain trapped in the shock until the shock
slows sufficiently for them to escape or for the shock to dissipate,
at which point they are released into the surrounding medium. Except at the highest energies (> 107 MeV) cosmic rays released as the
shock dissipates dominate the time-integrated cosmic ray spectrum
of a SNR (Ohira et al. 2010; Caprioli et al. 2010). This cosmic ray
spectrum is theoretically predicted (Bell 1978a; Longair 1994) to
−2 ,
follow a power-law in particle kinetic energy 𝐸 K , 𝑑𝑁/𝑑𝐸 K ∝ 𝐸 K
9
with an upper-cutoff of ∼ 10 MeV (set by the SNR magnetic field
strength and radius, Lagage & Cesarsky 1983; Schlickeiser 2002) and
a lower-cutoff of ∼ 10 −3 MeV (set by the shock velocity, Sazonov
& Sunyaev 2015). Simulations find this spectrum to be insensitive
to the environment of the supernovae (Sazonov & Sunyaev 2015).
Since cosmic rays with energies above the predicted upper limit of
109 MeV are observed, there is strong evidence for a second source of
cosmic rays, potentially active galactic nuclei (AGN) or gamma-ray
bursts (Alves Batista 2022). However, in this study, we limit our-

Cosmic Ray Heating and the 21-cm Signal
selves to considering only SNRs as sources of cosmic rays, as AGN
are expected to be rare at the high redshifts of interest.
Simulations of DSA and Milky Way observations suggest cosmic
rays carry away between 10 and 50 per cent of the initial kinetic energy of the shock (Drury et al. 1989; Berezinskii et al. 1990; Caprioli
& Spitkovsky 2014). The majority of this energy is in cosmic ray
protons (Schlickeiser 2002; Leite et al. 2017), with per cent level
portions of the energy in the form of alpha particles and electrons.
Hence, we restrict our heating modelling and this review to considering cosmic ray protons only1 .

2.2 Escape of cosmic rays into the IGM
Based on the findings of numerical simulations (Kitayama & Yoshida
2005; Greif et al. 2007; Whalen et al. 2008), Sazonov & Sunyaev
(2015) argued that Pop III SNRs forming in low-mass mini-halos (≲
107 M⊙ ) would have escaped the virial radius due to their progenitor
star having photoevaporated the gas out of the halo. The SNR then
only forms a shock front and begins to suffer significant radiative
energy losses once it caught up to the material previously ejected
from the halo. As a result, the SNR would not dissipate until it has
propagated out to the distance of several virial radii of the host minihalo which takes 1 − 10 Myr. Since the recombination time estimated
for the gas photoionized by the progenitor star is less than a few
million years, Sazonov & Sunyaev (2015) suggested that the cosmic
rays produced by the SNR are directly released into the neutral IGM
about the source mini-halo. For future ease of reference, we refer to
this mechanism for cosmic rays reaching the IGM as direct injection.
In more massive halos, such as the present-day Milky Way, the stars
are unable to photoevaporate the gas out to the virial radius. Hence,
when supernovae occur in these more massive halos the SNR rapidly
encounters the more dense gas causing the SNR to quickly lose its
thermal energy radiatively and dissipate, releasing cosmic rays into
the ISM. Observations in the Milky Way of the isotopic ratios of
Beryllium (Schlickeiser 2002) suggest that cosmic rays diffuse out of
the ISM into the surrounding IGM on a timescale of 10 Myr. Leite
et al. (2017) argued that since star-forming halos in the early universe
are anticipated to be smaller and have weaker magnetic fields than
the present-day Milky Way, a large proportion of cosmic rays would
be able to diffuse out into the IGM In contrast to the previously
discussed direct injection mechanism where cosmic rays are only
able to escape from the lowest mass halos, this mechanism which we
refer to as diffusive escape does not have an upper halo mass limit,
and so cosmic rays can escape into the IGM from all star-forming
halos.
The third mechanism by which cosmic rays can escape into the
IGM is galactic outflows, studied by Samui et al. (2018). The authors
demonstrated that 75 per cent of the IGM could be metal enriched
and heated at 𝑧 = 8 by galactic outflows driven by the pressure of
confined cosmic rays if star formation occurs in molecular cooling
halos. Due to the growth of these outflows, a significant portion of
the cosmic ray energy is lost to adiabatic expansion. As in diffusive
escape, there is no halo mass limit from which cosmic rays can be
emitted by galactic outflows, though the spectrum of cosmic rays
reaching the IGM will differ between the two mechanisms. Due to
these similarities between the last two emission mechanisms, we do
not distinguish between them in this paper. All conclusions of our

1

Cosmic ray electrons are however important to consider when modelling
SNR-produced radio backgrounds due to electrons producing a fraction
(𝑚 𝑝 /𝑚𝑒 ) 2 stronger synchrotron emission than protons (Jana et al. 2019).

3

study that apply to cosmic rays diffusing out of halos should be also
taken to apply to cosmic ray heating from galactic outflows.
2.3 Energy-loss mechanisms of cosmic ray protons
Once in the IGM, cosmic ray protons can lose their energy through
numerous mechanisms including excitation, ionization, Coulomb energy exchange with charged particles, and particle production in collisions (Schlickeiser 2002). However, when modelling cosmic ray
heating, we only need to consider mechanisms contributing to efficient energy loss by cosmic ray protons in the energy range of
interest. Hence, since in the early universe SNRs are believed to be
the predominant cosmic ray sources, we limit our considerations to
energies below 109 MeV, the highest energy SNRs can accelerate
cosmic ray protons to.
To determine whether an energy-loss mechanism for cosmic ray
protons is efficient we compare it to the energy-loss rate due to the
expansion of the universe. As the universe expands the momentum
of a cosmic ray proton decreases as the reciprocal of the scale factor.
Consequently, the kinetic energy, 𝐸 K (the energy potentially available
for heating), of a proton decreases as
!
𝑑𝐸 K
𝐸K
1
=
2−
,
(1)
𝑑𝑧 H 1 + 𝑧
1 + (𝑚 p 𝑐2 /𝐸 K )
where 𝑚 p is the mass of the proton. In this equation, the first term
entails the non-relativistic limit, and the second is the relativistic
correction. We can thus define the Hubble cooling timescale to be
𝑡H =

−𝐸 K
𝑑𝑡
,
𝑑𝐸 K /𝑑𝑧| H 𝑑𝑧

(2)

and for any other energy-loss mechanism (with placeholder label i)
we can similarly define its energy-loss timescale as
𝑡i =

−𝐸 K 𝑑𝑡
−𝐸 K
=
.
𝑑𝐸 K /𝑑𝑧| i 𝑑𝑧
𝑑𝐸 K /𝑑𝑡| i

(3)

The dominant energy-loss mechanism for a given value of 𝐸 K at a
given redshift 𝑧 is thus the mechanism with the lowest energy-loss
time scale. In the case where Hubble cooling is dominant, the energy
of the proton is principally lost to the expansion of the universe and
will not contribute to the heating of the IGM.
Previous studies have shown point-like electromagnetic interactions (e.g. bremsstrahlung, inverse Compton scattering, and synchrotron) and collisions with CMB photons to be inefficient mechanisms for cosmic ray proton energy loss2 (Schlickeiser 2002). Furthermore, pion production by collisions between neutral hydrogen
and cosmic ray protons is only efficient at energies above the range
of interest to us, while resistive heating is only dominant in the
highly ionized regions around galaxies invisible to the 21-cm signal (Yokoyama & Ohira 2022, 2023). Alongside Hubble cooling this
leaves three energy-loss mechanisms to consider3 : excitation and
ionization of neutral hydrogen atoms (Sazonov & Sunyaev 2015;
Jana & Nath 2018), Coulomb interactions with free electrons (Leite

2

These mechanisms have low cross-sections due to the small charge-tomass ratio of the proton compared to the electron, and the low energy of
CMB photons compared to the potential end product particle rest masses
respectively.
3 A new mechanism by which cosmic rays can transfer heat to their surrounding medium has recently been proposed called self-discharge (Ohira 2022).
Unfortunately, at this time estimates of the heating rate from this process are
not available and so we do not consider it further in this work.
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

4

T. Gessey-Jones et al.

et al. 2017), and Alfvén wave emission (Samui et al. 2018; Bera et al.
2023).
If a cosmic ray proton collides with a neutral hydrogen atom it can
directly ionize the atom. In each such interaction the cosmic ray proton losses ≈ 60 eV of energy to the liberated electron (Spitzer & Scott
1969; Sazonov & Sunyaev 2015), which can then ionize or excite
surrounding hydrogen atoms in secondary collisions. The energyloss rate of cosmic ray protons to this process is described by the
Bethe–Bloch equation, which for protons with 𝐸 K < 8.4 × 105 MeV
is well-approximated by (Schlickeiser 2002)


𝑑𝐸 K
≈ − 1.82 × 10 −7 eV s −1 cm3 𝑥HI 𝑛H
𝑑𝑡 E&I
(4)
2𝛽2
× [1 + 0.0185 ln(𝛽)Θ(𝛽 − 𝛽0 )] 3
.
𝛽0 + 2𝛽3
In the above equation, Θ is the Heaviside step function, 𝑥HI the hydrogen neutral fraction, 𝑛H the physical number density of hydrogen,
𝛽 = v/𝑐 the normalized velocity of the proton, and 𝛽0 = 0.01 the loss
rate peak. Due to the small value of 𝛽0 , this process is anticipated
to be the strongest for non-relativistic protons, and the strength of
this mechanism will decrease as the IGM ionizes owing to its scaling
with 𝑥HI .
Cosmic ray protons can also transfer energy directly to any free
electrons in the IGM via Coulomb interactions, with this energy again
being dissipated into heat in the IGM via the subsequent collisions of
these energetic electrons. The equations to describe the rate at which
cosmic ray protons lose energy to this mechanism were derived by
Butler & Buckingham (1962), Sivukhin (1965), and Gould (1972)
and are well approximated this time by (Schlickeiser 2002)


−7 eV s −1 cm3 𝑥 𝑛 𝛽2
−
3.1
×
10
e b
𝑑𝐸 K
(5)
,
≈

3/2
𝑑𝑡 C
𝑇e /2.45 × 109 K
+ 𝛽3
where 𝑥 𝑒 is the electron fraction, 𝑛𝑏 the number density of baryons,
and 𝑇e is the temperature of the free electrons which we take to be
the kinetic temperature of the IGM, 𝑇K . Hence, unlike excitation and
ionization interactions, the efficiency of this mechanism increases as
the IGM becomes more and more ionized.
Lastly, since cosmic rays are charged they gyrate along magnetic
field lines B generating Alfvén waves (Samui et al. 2018) which carry
away a portion of their energy. The dissipation of these Alfvén waves
then transfers this energy to the IGM as heat at rate |B · ∇𝑃cr |/(4𝜋𝜌)
where 𝑃cr is the pressure from cosmic rays and 𝜌 is the IGM physical
density. Due to the dependence on 𝑃cr this is a bulk effect, unlike
the energy-loss mechanisms mentioned previously, which can be
considered in terms of individual protons. Consequently, we cannot
define an energy-loss timescale for this mechanism in the same way
we have done above. However, Bera et al. (2023) provides an estimate
for when Alfvén wave dissipation is an efficient heating process by
comparing the IGM heating timescale in this case (𝜏A = 𝑇K /𝑇¤K )
with the Hubble time (𝜏H = 1/𝐻), note the latter differs by a factor
of order unity from 𝑡H defined in equation (1). For the Planck 2018
best-fit ΛCDM cosmology (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020) this
ratio becomes

 



𝜏A
1 + 𝑧 4 𝑇K
0.1 nG
𝐿
≈ 0.14
𝜏H
16
10 K
𝐵0
0.01 Mpc
(6)


−5
−3
5 × 10 eV cm
×
.
𝑈cr
Here 𝐵0 is the magnitude of the primordial IGM magnetic field
seen today, 𝑈cr the cosmic ray energy density, and 𝐿 the typical
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

length-scale of cosmic ray pressure gradients taken by Bera et al.
(2023) to be the inter-halo distance. There is much uncertainty surrounding 𝐵0 with upper bounds of ∼ 1 nG from CMB observations
at 1 cMpc scale (Planck Collaboration et al. 2016) and lower limits from second-order perturbation theory of ∼ 10 −11 nG at 10 ckpc
(Ichiki et al. 2006). Recently there have also been attempts to measure the magnetic field in voids today with a disputed lower bound
due to Blazar observations of ∼ 10 −6 nG (Tavecchio et al. 2011), and
potential measurement of ∼ 10 −7 nG from gamma-ray bursts (Xia
et al. 2022), though it is still unclear if the present-day void magnetic field is primordial in origin or has been enhanced by outflows
from galaxies (Samui et al. 2018). Thus, the reference value of 𝐵0
adopted above is at the upper limits of the 11 orders of magnitude
permitted range, with the majority of this range (𝐵0 ≲ 0.01 nG)
leading to inefficient Alfvén wave heating of the IGM for the redshift
range of interest. Therefore, we elect to ignore Alfvén wave losses
from cosmic rays in our modelling and instead revisit this mechanism
briefly in section 5 to discuss how our results would be changed by
its inclusion due to a high 𝐵0 . Note as the magnetic fields essential
to DSA (see Section 2.1) are produced in the SNR shock itself by
the Weibel instability, a weak background magnetic field would not
prevent cosmic ray acceleration by the first supernovae (Ohira &
Murase 2019).
The relative importance of energy-loss mechanisms for cosmic ray
protons can now be determined via a comparison of their energy-loss
timescales 𝑡 𝑖 , with the lowest value corresponding to the dominant
process. Such a comparison is shown in Fig. 1 for 𝑧 = 8, 12, 20, and
30. In the figure, we normalize all energy-loss timescales via 𝑡 H to
allow for easier comparison between redshifts. Since reionization is
anticipated to be patchy (Choudhury 2022), 𝑥e (and with it efficiencies of some of the aforementioned mechanisms) is expected to vary
greatly between different regions in our simulations. To demonstrate
the importance of this effect for the cosmic ray heating, we show
Coulomb heating timescales for both a fully ionized region (the case
referred to as Coulomb Ionized Bubbles in the figure) and for the
average value of 𝑥e outside of ionized bubbles taken from the reference simulation presented in subsection 4.1.1 (the case referred to
as Coulomb Outside Bubbles). Note that inside the ionized bubbles
no excitation or ionization interactions occur, so the timescale depicted is that for cosmic rays outside of ionized bubbles. As we see
from the figure, Hubble cooling dominates above 𝐸 K ∼ 30 MeV at
all redshifts, suggesting higher energy relativistic cosmic rays do not
contribute substantially to the IGM heating in agreement with the
findings of Sazonov & Sunyaev (2015). At lower energies, outside
ionized bubbles, excitation and ionization energy losses are dominant at all redshifts, while inside ionized bubbles Coulomb losses are
dominant. Our findings at lower energies and low redshifts (𝑧 ∼ 8)
seemingly contradict the conclusions of Leite et al. (2017), who
showed Coulomb energy-losses dominate excitation and ionization
losses at lower energies towards the end of reionization. However,
this is not a discrepancy as Leite et al. (2017) used a globally averaged 𝑥e while we have distinguished between fully-ionized and
non-fully-ionized regions of the IGM. We reach the same conclusion
as Leite et al. (2017) when the globally averaged 𝑥e is used.
Since this paper is principally concerned with modelling the 21cm signal of neutral hydrogen, we are primarily interested in heating
outside of fully ionized bubbles. Therefore, the mechanisms of interest to us are excitation and ionization losses, and Hubble cooling.
However, due to the similarity between the energy-loss timescales of
Coulomb interactions inside ionized bubbles and excitation and ionization interactions outside of them, the resulting energy evolution

Normalized Energy-Loss Timescale tloss /tH

Cosmic Ray Heating and the 21-cm Signal

101

z=8

z = 12

z = 20

z = 30

5

100
10−1
10−2

101

Excitation & Ionization
Coulomb Outside Bubbles
Coulomb Ionized Bubbles
Hubble Expansion

100
10−1

p+ + p+ → p+ + p+ + πs
p+ + γ → p+ + πs

10−2

p + + γ → p + + e+ + e−
Radiative Losses

10−1

101

103

105

10−1

107

Proton Kinetic Energy EK [MeV]

101

103

105

107

Proton Kinetic Energy EK [MeV]

Figure 1. Comparison of energy-loss timescales (normalized by the Hubble cooling timescale to keep a consistent scale between redshifts) for cosmic ray
protons at 𝑧 = 8 (top left), 12 (top right), 20 (bottom left), and 30 (bottom right). We consider excitation and ionization of neutral hydrogen (blue), Coulomb
interactions with free electrons (orange), Hubble cooling (black), collisions with matter producing pions (green), collisions with photons producing pions (pink)
or electron-positron pairs (brown), and radiative losses (purple). For Coulomb energy losses we distinguish between the IGM in an ionized bubble (dot-dashed)
and outside of ionized bubbles (solid). Inside ionized bubbles we take 𝑥e = 1, and outside we use values of 0.0072, 0.0014, 0.0002, and 0.0002 in ascending
redshift order from the output of the reference simulation (subsection 4.1.1). 𝑛H is taken as the cosmological average value. At high energies, 𝐸K ≳ 10 MeV, we
find that Hubble cooling is the dominant mechanism (the lowest energy-loss timescale) both inside and outside ionized bubbles. For lower energies, Coulomb
dominates in ionized bubbles, and excitation and ionization dominates outside of ionized bubbles. Pion-producing collisions with matter, photon collisions, and
radiative losses remain subdominant for the energy range considered here, with the latter three being too inefficient to appear on the scale shown.

equation for cosmic ray protons is anticipated to be a good model for
cosmic rays propagating through ionized regions as well.

heating rate per baryon, 𝜖 cr ,
primary

Λcr
2.4 Cosmic ray heating and ionization
Not all of the energy lost by cosmic rays, discussed above, is converted to the IGM heat. None of the energy lost to Hubble cooling is
transferred to the IGM, and of the energy lost to excitation and ionization only a portion 𝑓heat ultimately ends up as heat energy in the
IGM with the rest lost to the ionization energy and the de-excitation
spectral line emission of excited hydrogen atoms. Spitzer & Scott
(1969) calculated the heat transfer in excitation and ionization interactions of cosmic ray protons for several different free electron
fractions 𝑥e .
We note the value of 𝑓heat is quite sensitive to small changes in
𝑥e , varying from 10% to 53% between 𝑥e values of 10 −4 and 0.5.
Therefore, while recent studies found cosmic rays do not contribute
significantly to reionization (Sazonov & Sunyaev 2015; Leite et al.
2017), ionization, including that from cosmic rays, may strongly
impact the cosmic ray heating rate. Thus, it should be considered and
modelled self-consistently.
Per primary ionization of a neutral hydrogen atom, a cosmic ray
proton losses ≈ 60 eV (Sazonov & Sunyaev 2015), of which the
fraction 𝑓heat contributes to heating the IGM. The primary ionization
primary
rate per baryon Λcr
can then be found from the cosmic ray

=

1
𝜖cr .
60 eV 𝑓heat

(7)

Primary electrons freed by cosmic ray interactions can then cause
secondary ionizations in their subsequent collisions. The average
number of secondary ionizations per primary ionization 𝜙 for various
values of 𝑥e were also calculated by Spitzer & Scott (1969). Thus the
full cosmic ray ionization rate per baryon is given by
Λcr =

1+𝜙
𝜖 cr .
60 eV 𝑓heat

(8)

2.5 Propagation of cosmic rays through the IGM
Since the early universe is not homogeneous alongside the rate of
cosmic ray heating in the IGM, we must also consider its spatial
distribution. Most previous studies of cosmic ray heating (Sazonov
& Sunyaev 2015; Leite et al. 2017; Jana et al. 2019; Bera et al.
2023) have assumed the heating to be spatially uniform. This assumption is partially motivated by arguments that cosmic ray heating should reach inter-halo distances (≳ 0.1cMpc at 𝑧 = 20), based
upon the Bohm diffusivity lower bound and Larmor radius of cosmic
rays (Stacy & Bromm 2007; Sazonov & Sunyaev 2015).
A more detailed study of the distribution of cosmic ray proton and
the heating pattern around the source halos was undertaken by Jana
& Nath (2018), who modelled cosmic rays as diffusing out of their
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

6

T. Gessey-Jones et al.

source halos with a constant diffusivity 𝐷. This is physically motivated by cosmic rays scattering from magnetic fields leading to them
undergoing a random walk and is similar to models of cosmic ray
propagation through the Milky Way ISM such as GALPROP (Strong
& Moskalenko 1998; Ptuskin 2012). From their study Jana & Nath
(2018) conclude that cosmic ray heating around minihalos between
𝑧 = 10 and 20 was uniform, while it would be inhomogeneous around
high-mass galaxies with low star formation rates. However, importantly, they conclude their results are not definitive due to the large
uncertainties in the value of the cosmic ray diffusivity in the early universe. These uncertainties come about in part due to the large, up to 11
orders of magnitude, uncertainty in the IGM magnetic field discussed
in the previous subsection, and due to the scaling of cosmic ray diffusivity with cosmic ray energy and magnetic field being unknown.
Even if cosmic ray heating is uniform on the typical distance scale
between minihalos as Jana & Nath (2018) tentatively concluded, this
does not necessarily mean cosmic ray heating is uniform throughout
the universe since at early times star-forming minihalos are highly
clustered around rare overdensities (Barkana & Loeb 2004; Barkana
2016). Instead, it would imply cosmic ray heating is uniform on the
scales on which minihalo number density is uniform.
The uncertainty surrounding the propagation of cosmic rays in the
early universe IGM leads us to consider multiple different modes of
cosmic ray propagation in our study, both to bracket the range of
physically plausible scenarios and also to allow us to investigate the
potential of the 21-cm signal to distinguish between these possibilities.

3 SEMI-NUMERICAL 21-CM SIGNAL SIMULATIONS
Having outlined the five necessary steps to modelling cosmic ray
heating in the previous section, we introduce our 21-cm signal simulation code and detail the changes we make to include the new heating
mechanism.

3.1 Background theory and current simulation code
21-cm cosmology aims to observe the absorption or emission at the
21-cm spectral line of atomic hydrogen (Furlanetto et al. 2006). The
strength of the 21-cm signal is dependent on the number density of
atoms in the hyperfine states 𝑛1 , where the magnetic moments of
proton and electron are aligned, compared to the state 𝑛0 , where the
magnetic moments are anti-aligned. Additionally, the signal depends
on the background flux of photons at the 21-cm line, commonly quantified in terms of the radiation temperature 𝑇𝛾 . We can conveniently
express the relative occupancy of the hyperfine states in terms of spin
temperature, 𝑇s , via the use of the Boltzmann distribution (Scott &
Rees 1990)


𝑛1
𝐸
= 3 exp − 21 ,
(9)
𝑛0
𝑘 B𝑇s
where the factor of three comes from the three-fold degeneracy of
the higher-energy states, and 𝐸 21 = 5.87 𝜇eV (corresponding to
𝜈21 = 1420 MHz) is the small energy difference between the aligned
and anti-aligned states. The relative value of 𝑇s to 𝑇𝛾 determines
whether the signal is to be seen in emission (𝑇s > 𝑇𝛾 ) or absorption
(𝑇s < 𝑇𝛾 ). A more detailed treatment of the radiative transfer problem, accounting for the number density of hydrogen 𝑛H , hydrogen
neutral fraction 𝑥HI , and the gradual redshifting of photons into and
out of the spectral line allows for the calculation of the differential
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

21-cm brightness temperature that would be seen today
𝑇21 = 1 − 𝑒 − 𝜏21

 𝑇s − 𝑇𝛾
,
1+𝑧

(10)

formally defined as the difference in radiation temperature seen at
𝜈 = 𝜈21 /(1 + 𝑧) due to the emission/absorption at the 21-cm line by
the IGM at redshift 𝑧. In the above equation 𝜏21 is the 21-cm optical
depth given by
"
#
3 ℎ𝑐3 𝐴10
𝑥HI 𝑛H
1
𝜏21 =
,
(11)
32𝜋 𝑘 B 𝜈 2
(1 + 𝑧) 2 (𝑑v ∥ /𝑑𝑟 ∥ ) 𝑇s
21

where 𝐴10 = 2.85×10 −15 s −1 is the spontaneous emission rate of the
21-cm transition, and 𝑑v ∥ /𝑑𝑟 ∥ the proper velocity gradient along the
line of sight including the Hubble flow. In summary, simulating the
21-cm signal requires determining 𝑇𝛾 , 𝑇s , and 𝑥HI . In this study, we
assume the background radiation temperature 𝑇𝛾 to be just the CMB
radiation, 2.725(1 + 𝑧) K. We leave the simultaneous consideration
of excess radio backgrounds (Feng & Holder 2018; Ewall-Wice et al.
2018; Fialkov & Barkana 2019; Reis et al. 2020) and cosmic ray
heating to future investigations.
The calculation of the spin temperature 𝑇s of the IGM is complicated due to it being acted upon by three competing influences:
collisional coupling to the kinetic temperature of the IGM (𝑇K ), radiative coupling to the background 21-cm radiation temperature (𝑇𝛾 ),
and indirect coupling to 𝑇K via the scattering of Lyman line photons,
the Wouthuysen-Field effect (WF, Wouthuysen 1952; Field 1958).
The efficiency of each of these processes at any given redshift is
encapsulated by the corresponding coupling coefficient, 𝑥c , 𝑥 𝛾 , and
𝑥 𝛼 , which are in turn derived from atomic physics and the intensity
of the Lyman line radiation fields (Furlanetto et al. 2006; Venumadhav et al. 2018). Once these coupling coefficients are found the spin
temperature can be computed iteratively using
𝑥c𝑇K−1 + 𝑥 𝛾 𝑇𝛾−1 + 𝑥 𝛼 𝑇c−1
1
=
,
𝑇s
𝑥c + 𝑥 𝛾 + 𝑥 𝛼

(12)

where 𝑇c is the colour temperature of Ly 𝛼 photons (Barkana 2016).
At cosmic dawn, the first generation of stars is anticipated to have
filled the early universe with a background of Ly 𝛼 photons causing
the WF coupling to dominate the other processes (with 𝑥 𝛼 ≫ 𝑥 𝛾 , 𝑥c )
resulting in 𝑇s ≈ 𝑇K . Hence before reionization when 𝑥HI ≈ 1, but
after cosmic dawn we anticipate (from equation 10) that the 21-cm
signal should trace variation in the gas temperature of the IGM,
making it particularly sensitive to cosmic ray heating along with
other heating/cooling mechanisms. However, since our study spans
a wider range of redshifts than those for which the aforementioned
approximation is valid we always utilize equation 12 when calculating
𝑇s .
We thus also need to determine 𝑇K and the Lyman line radiation
fields to compute 𝑇s . 𝑇K can be calculated by solving the ordinary
differential equation describing the balance of heating and cooling
influences on the IGM (Mesinger et al. 2011)
2
𝑑𝑡 ∑︁
𝑑𝑇K (𝑧)
=
𝜖p
𝑑𝑧
3𝑘 B (1 + 𝑥e ) 𝑑𝑧 p
(13)
2 𝑇K 𝑑𝑛b
𝑇
𝑑𝑥 e 2𝑇K
+
− K
+
.
3 𝑛b 𝑑𝑧
1 + 𝑥e 𝑑𝑧
1+𝑧
The first term encompasses the heating/cooling rate per baryon, 𝜖 p ,
due to various astrophysical processes, in our simulations, we include
X-ray heating (Fialkov et al. 2014b), Compton heating (Madau et al.
1997), Ly 𝛼 heating (Reis et al. 2021), and CMB heating (Venumadhav et al. 2018; Fialkov & Barkana 2019; Reis et al. 2021). Later

Cosmic Ray Heating and the 21-cm Signal
we extend this list to include cosmic ray heating as well. Next, the
second term represents heating due to structure formation, and the
third term takes into account cooling due to the increasing number
of particles caused by the reionization of the IGM. Lastly, the fourth
term represents the adiabatic cooling of the gas due to the expansion
of the universe.
To compute the Lyman line radiation fields, and thus 𝑥 𝛼 , we follow
the methodology of Reis et al. (2021), an extension of Barkana &
Loeb (2005) and Fialkov et al. (2014a). Hence, we also assume
the Wouthuysen-Field effect is dominated by Ly 𝛼 photons due to
such photons scattering orders of magnitude more times than higher
Lyman line photons (Furlanetto et al. 2006). As a result, in this model,
the WF coupling is taken to simply be directly proportional to the
Ly 𝛼 line radiation field 𝐽 𝛼 (Madau et al. 1997)
𝑥𝛼 =

1 16𝜋 2 𝐸 21 𝑒 2 𝑓 𝛼
𝐽𝛼,
𝐴10𝑇𝛾 27𝑚 e 𝑐𝑘 B

(14)

where 𝑓 𝛼 = 0.4162 is the oscillator strength of the Ly 𝛼 transition.
Two separate contributions to 𝐽 𝛼 are modelled, photons that directly
redshift into Ly 𝛼 and photons produced in the cascading decays of
neutral hydrogen excited by higher Lyman line photons. For the latter, it is assumed that photons emitted between Ly 𝛽 and the Lyman
limit travel on radial geodesics away from sources until they redshift
into the Lyman line below their emission frequency and cascade into
a Ly 𝛼 photon with a line dependant recycling fraction. Whereas the
paths of photons emitted between Ly 𝛼 and Ly 𝛽 that directly redshift
into Ly 𝛼, are treated as random walks due to their many scatterings in the tails of the Ly 𝛼 line. In the simulation, both radiative
transfer processes are implemented using isotropic window functions. These window functions are analytic spherical shells for the
cascading photons and fits to Monto Carlo simulations for directly
redshifting photons. By convolving the window functions with emissivity fields, which are in turn derived from the past star formation
rate and stellar population, 𝐽 𝛼 and 𝑥 𝛼 can be calculated efficiently
throughout the simulation box.
Finally, we need to compute the neutral fraction 𝑥HI of the IGM,
for which we adopt an approach similar to Mesinger et al. (2011).
We use an excursion set-based formalism (Furlanetto et al. 2004) to
identify regions that have been fully ionized (𝑥HI = 0) by galactic
UV emission, which is anticipated to be the dominant mechanism
driving reionization (Yajima et al. 2011, 2014; Wise et al. 2014; Ma
et al. 2020). A region is considered fully ionized if there exists a
spherical volume of radius 𝑅 centred on that region in which the
time-integrated ionizing UV emission exceeds the effective number
of neutral atoms within said volume. Hence, for an effective galactic
ionization efficiency per baryon 𝜁, and collapse fraction of baryons
into galaxies 𝑓coll (x, 𝑅) averaged over a volume of radius 𝑅 centered
at x, the point x is considered ionized if
∃𝑅 < 𝑅mfp ,

s.t.

𝜁 𝑓coll (x, 𝑅) ≥ 1.

(15)

Where 𝑅mfp is some maximum radius UV photons can travel to,
normally set to the mean free path of ionizing photons in the ionized
IGM at the end of reionization (Furlanetto & Oh 2005), hence the
choice of notation. However, such an approach on its own would
ignore the residual ionization leftover from recombination and any
ionization from other sources such as X-rays (Pacucci et al. 2014) or
the cosmic rays we describe in this paper. Hence, we use a modified
version of equation (15) introduced by Mesinger et al. (2013) to take
into account the region already being partially ionized by these other
mechanisms. With x considered ionized if
∃𝑅 < 𝑅mfp ,

s.t.

𝜁 𝑓coll (x, 𝑅) ≥ 1 − 𝑥e,oth (x, 𝑅),

(16)

7

where 𝑥e,oth (x, 𝑅) is the ionization fraction of the IGM when not
including the UV contribution, averaged over the same sphere as
𝑓coll (x, 𝑅). 𝑥e,oth (x) in turn is determined by solving the ionization
differential equation

𝑑𝑥 e,oth (x, 𝑧)
𝑑𝑡 
2
=
Λion − 𝑛H 𝛼B 𝑥e,oth
,
(17)
𝑑𝑧
𝑑𝑧
with the first term encapsulating ionization at a rate of Λion per baryon
from non-UV sources (e.g. X-rays and cosmic rays), and the second
term modelling type-B recombination (Furlanetto et al. 2006) with
recombination coefficient 𝛼B = 2.6×10 −13 (𝑇K /104 K) −0.7 cm3 s −1 .
It is assumed in our simulations that the ionization fraction of hydrogen and helium is the same, as a result helium double ionization is
not modelled. This reionization model is hence built on the assumption that ionization from UV is isolated to fully ionized bubbles,
whereas other sources of ionization can travel into the neutral IGM
and give rise to partial ionization. In practice, such bubbles may be
smaller than the resolution of a simulation, which if not accounted
for could lead to erroneous 21-cm signal predictions. To mitigate this
issue regions that are not fully ionized are modelled as a two-phased
medium, one fully ionized and one ionized to 𝑥e,oth (x), an approximation that was validated by Zahn et al. (2011) against radiative
transfer simulations. The relative proportion of the region taken up
by each phase being given by the region’s overall neutral fraction
𝑥HI (x) = 1 − 𝜁 𝑓coll (x) − 𝑥e,oth (x).

(18)

Combined this multi-stage approach to ionization allows for the
modelling of the propagation of fully ionized bubbles on both subresolution and resolved scales, while also accounting for the evolution of the ionization fraction of the mostly-neutral IGM outside
these bubbles.
The above equations combined with a parameterized prescription
of star formation rate and stellar/galactic emission form the foundations of our semi-numerical 21-cm signal simulation code (e.g.,
Visbal et al. 2012; Fialkov et al. 2014a; Cohen et al. 2016; Reis et al.
2021). The simulation starts from cosmological initial conditions for
overdensity and baryon-dark matter relative velocity computed using
CAMB (Lewis et al. 2000; Lewis & Bridle 2002; Lewis & Challinor
2011), and initial conditions for the gas temperature and residual
ionization fractions computed using RECFAST (Seager et al. 2011).
For the purposes of this study, all these fields are created on a 1283
grid of cells, each cell being a 3 cMpc sided cube. These initial conditions are then evolved forward in time, at each step an analytic
prescription being used to compute the expected halo mass distribution within each simulation cell (Barkana & Loeb 2004; Fialkov
et al. 2012). The code then employs the star formation prescription
of Magg et al. (2022b) to translate these halo mass distributions into
Pop III and Pop II star formation rates for each cell and in turn into
an emission rate for various types of electromagnetic radiation. Our
radiative transfer model then propagates the radio, Lyman band, and
X-ray radiation fields via pre-computed window functions4 . With the
radiation fields in each cell, equations (10), (12), (13), (14), (16), (17)
and (18) are then solved simultaneously to determine the expected
4

The accuracy of using the window functions of Reis et al. (2021) for Ly 𝛼
radiative transfer has been recently explored in Semelin et al. (2023) through a
comparison to full radiative transfer models. The window functions approach
is found to perform well when not including peculiar velocities, but errors
in the 21-cm power spectrum are seen when modelling of peculiar velocities
are included. We are not aware of any similar comparative studies assessing
the accuracy of the window functions approach for radio or X-ray radiative
transfer.
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

8

T. Gessey-Jones et al.

Table 1. Default values of 21-cm signal simulation parameters used throughout this work. If a simulation uses parameter values other than those listed
here those that differ and their values will be explicitly stated.
Parameter
𝑓∗,II
𝑓∗,III
𝑡recov
𝜁
𝑅mfp
𝑓X
𝑓rad
𝑝LW
Pop III 𝛼
Pop III 𝑀min
Pop III 𝑀max

Value
0.05
0.02
30 Myr
15
50 cMpc
0
0
0.75
Log-flat
2 M⊙
180 M ⊙

Description
Pop II star formation efficiency
Pop III star formation efficiency
Recovery time of star-forming halos
Effective galactic ionization efficiency
Mean free path of ionizing photons
Galactic X-ray emission efficiency
Galactic radio emission efficiency
LW feedback delay (Fialkov et al. 2013)
Exponent of Pop III IMF
Minimum Pop III mass
Maximum Pop III mass

21-cm signal. Ultimately the simulations provide full tomographic
maps of 𝑇21 at each redshift step from which other 21-cm observables
can be computed.
Due to the uncertainty surrounding the universe between recombination and reionization, many aspects of our semi-numerical simulations are parameterized as exact values are not known. Except when
stated otherwise in this paper we use the parameters listed in Table 1.
Our ionization model is described by two of these parameters 𝜁
the effective galactic ionization efficiency per baryon, and 𝑅mfp the
mean free path of ionizing photons in the ionized IGM at the end
of reionization. While 𝑅mfp has a direct physical interpretation 𝜁
is phenomenological, encapsulating the star formation efficiency of
ionizing sources, the ionizing UV escape fraction, the stellar UV
emissivity, and the reduction in effective ionization efficiency due to
recombinations and clumping of the IGM (Furlanetto et al. 2004). In
an upcoming paper, we refine this reionization model by modelling
the individual physically-interpretable components of 𝜁. Since we
observe the impacts of cosmic ray heating on the 21-cm signal to be
strongest prior to 𝑧 = 10 we find varying these reionization parameters has no impact on our qualitative conclusions. Hence throughout
this paper, we fix the values of these two parameters. With 𝜁 set to
15, to recover optical depths to the CMB of 𝜏 ≈ 0.06 consistent with
the Planck 2018 measurements (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020),
and 𝑅mfp fixed to 50 cMpc, motivated by the theoretical expectation of a mean free path of ionizing photons in the ionized IGM of
70 cMpc (Wyithe & Loeb 2004) at 𝑧 = 6.
For all of our simulations, we enable baryon-dark matter relative
velocities (Fialkov et al. 2012), Ly 𝛼 heating (Reis et al. 2021), CMB
heating (Venumadhav et al. 2018), Pop II star formation rate suppression in low-mass halos (Fialkov et al. 2013), Ly 𝛼 multiple scattering (Reis et al. 2021), photoheating feedback (Cohen et al. 2016),
and model the non-instantaneous emission of Pop III stars (GesseyJones et al. 2022). In this work, we do not enable Poisson fluctuations
of star-forming halos (Reis et al. 2022). We derive the Pop III star
Lyman band and Lyman-Werner band emissivities self consistently
from the power-law IMF specified in Table 1. The ionizing UV emissivity and X-ray emissivity of Pop III stars are not currently derived
from the IMF but will be in future studies (Gessey-Jones et al. in
preparation; Liu et al. in preparation).
Unlike future experiments such as SKA2-LOW (Koopmans et al.
2015), which are expected to make full tomographic maps of 𝑇21 ,
experimental efforts so far have concentrated on measuring either the
sky-average of the signal ⟨𝑇21 (𝑧)⟩ (Voytek et al. 2014; Sokolowski
et al. 2015; Bowman et al. 2018; Price et al. 2018; Philip et al. 2019;
Burns 2021; Singh et al. 2022; de Lera Acedo et al. 2022) or the power
spectrum of its spatial variations (Ellingson et al. 2009; Parsons et al.
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

2014; Ewall-Wice et al. 2016; Price et al. 2018; Mertens et al. 2020,
2021; Abdurashidova et al. 2022). Throughout this paper, we use the
Δ2 power spectrum convention,
∗
𝑇˜21 (k, 𝑧) 𝑇˜21
k′ , 𝑧



= (2𝜋) 3 𝛿 𝐷 k − k′

 2𝜋 2 2
Δ (𝑘, 𝑧),
𝑘3

(19)

where k is the comoving wavevector and 𝛿 𝐷 the Dirac delta-function.
Given the experimental interest, we concentrate our study on cosmic
ray heating signatures in the global 21-cm signal, power spectrum
and tomographic maps. For our analysis, we include redshift space
distortions when computing the 21-cm global signal and power spectrum but not when depicting 21-cm tomographic maps.
3.2 Updating Lyman-Werner feedback prescription
In addition to introducing cosmic ray heating as described in the
subsequent subsection, we make a further modification to our seminumerical simulation code. Previous versions of our simulation code
utilized the fitting formula from Fialkov et al. (2012) to model the
minimum halo mass required for star formation via molecular cooling, this formula included modelling of the increase of this mass
threshold due to the Lyman-Werner feedback and baryon-dark matter relative velocities. Muñoz et al. (2022), Nebrin et al. (2023),
and Hegde & Furlanetto (2023) recently highlighted the Fialkov
et al. (2012) formula does not account for the mitigation of the LW
feedback by H2 self-shielding, and consequently over-predicts the
strength of the LW feedback compared to what is seen in the numerical simulations of Schauer et al. (2021) and Kulkarni et al. (2021).
Hence, we adopt the fitting formula of Muñoz et al. (2022) which has
been calibrated to the aforementioned recent numerical simulations.
Muñoz et al. (2022), motivated by Kulkarni et al. (2021), assume
that the increase in the mass threshold due to the LW feedback and
baryon-dark matter relative velocities can be each accounted for by
factors 𝑓LW and 𝑓vcb which combine multiplicatively. By comparison
to numerical simulations Muñoz et al. (2022) find a best-fit model of
𝑓LW = 1 + 2.0(𝐽21 ) 0.6 ,
where 𝐽21 is the LW band
10 −21 erg s −1 cm −2 sr1 Hz −1 , and

 1.8
v
𝑓 𝑣cb = 1 + cb
,
vrms

(20)
intensity

normalized

to

(21)

where vrms , is the root mean square velocity of the baryon-dark
matter relative velocities at the relevant redshift. The critical halo
mass for molecular cooling star formation is then given by


1 + 𝑧 −3/2
𝑀mol,crit = 𝑀𝑧=20 𝑓LW 𝑓vcb
(22)
21
where the redshift dependant term is motivated by the simulation
findings of Kulkarni et al. (2021) and theoretical predictions of
Tegmark et al. (1997). In this study we take 𝑀𝑧=20 = 5.8 × 105 M⊙ .
This value was chosen due to it being 1𝜎 below the mean mass at
which molecular cooling halos start forming stars in the 𝐽21 = 0,
vbc = 0 simulation of Schauer et al. (2021). We use 1𝜎 below
the mean (instead of using the minimum or average mass) to account for the fact that we have a sharp cutoff with mass in halos
that are Pop III star-forming (as opposed to the gradual transition
found in the simulation). Therefore, using the minimum or average
would lead us to over-predict or under-predict the star formation
rate respectively. Additionally, in our simulations, we correct for the

Cosmic Ray Heating and the 21-cm Signal
delayed response between molecular cooling star formation and the
exponentially growing 𝐽21 by employing the methodology of Fialkov
et al. (2013). Instead of using the 𝐽21 field of the current simulation
time step in the feedback calculation, we use the field from when
the universe was a fraction 𝑝 LW = 0.75 of its age at that timestep.
𝑝 LW can be varied from this fiducial value to simulate stronger and
weaker than expected LW feedback.
The above feedback prescription allows us to model the minimum halo mass required for star formation due to molecular cooling.
However, star formation can also occur via atomic cooling or, if a
previous generation of stars has metal-enriched a halo, metal cooling.
To account for atomic cooling we take the minimum halo mass for
Pop III stars to form as the lower of the molecular cooling threshold 𝑀mol,crit and the atomic cooling threshold 𝑀atm,crit (Fialkov
et al. 2013), which is not impacted by the LW feedback. Since we
follow the star formation prescription of Magg et al. (2022b) we
model metal-cooling Pop II star formation separately to Pop III stars.
This prescription is based upon fits to A-SLOTH (Magg et al. 2022a)
merger tree models, and assumes Pop II star formation occurs rapidly
due to metal-cooling once a halo has had time to recover from the
ejection of material by the supernova of the first generation of stars.
External metal enrichment of halos is not included in the model as the
authors of that study found including such a mechanism had little impact on the Pop II and Pop III star formation rates they derived. Since
Pop III and Pop II star formation are triggered by distinct cooling
mechanisms our simulations take separate star formation efficiencies
𝑓∗,III and 𝑓∗,II for these processes.

3.3 Our cosmic ray heating model
We now describe the model for cosmic ray heating we have integrated
into our semi-numerical simulations. The model was intentionally
developed to be versatile and include free parameters in order to
encapsulate the range of different approaches of previous studies and
allow for the uncertainties in the underlying physics discussed in
section 2.

our modelling. Motivated by theoretical predictions, we take the
spectrum of cosmic rays injected into the IGM as a power-law
𝑑𝑁
∝ 𝐸 K𝛼cr
𝑑𝐸 K

[𝐸 K,min ≤ 𝐸 K ≤ 𝐸 K,max ],

(23)

with exponent 𝛼cr , lower kinetic energy cutoff 𝐸 K,min and upper
kinetic energy cutoff 𝐸 K,max . We keep 𝛼cr , 𝐸 K,min and 𝐸 K,max as
free parameters to account for the potential difference between the
spectrum of cosmic rays produced at the shock front and that of
the rays injected into the IGM. The parameterization also allows
us to explore the sensitivity of cosmic ray heating to the cosmic ray
spectrum, which was previously found to be significant for variations
in 𝐸 K,min (Sazonov & Sunyaev 2015) and 𝛼cr (Leite et al. 2017)5 .
Thus we compute the injection rate of cosmic rays into the IGM per
time interval 𝑑𝑡 and volume 𝑑𝑉 at cell x to be
𝐸 K𝛼cr
𝑑 3 𝑁 (x, 𝐸 K , 𝑧)
max
=
𝜂cr SFRDcr (x; 𝑀cr
),
𝑑𝐸 K 𝑑𝑡𝑑𝑉
N (𝛼cr )

(24)

for 𝐸 K,min ≤ 𝐸 K ≤ 𝐸 K,max , where the normalization factor is defined to be
(
ln(𝐸 K,max ) − ln(𝐸K,min ),
𝛼 = −2,
N (𝛼cr ) =  2+𝛼cr
(25)
2+𝛼cr
𝐸 K,max − 𝐸 K,min /(2 + 𝛼cr ) , otherwise.
3.3.2 Energy-loss and propagation
With our source term specified, we now turn our attention to how
cosmic ray protons behave inside the IGM.
By combining equations (1) and (4), accounting for the energy
losses to Hubble cooling and excitation and ionization respectively,
we can construct a differential equation that describes the evolution
of a cosmic ray proton energy in the neutral IGM
𝑑𝐸 K
𝑑𝐸 K
𝑑𝑡
𝑑𝐸 K
=
+
𝑑𝑧
𝑑𝑧 H
𝑑𝑡 E&I 𝑑𝑧
!


𝐸K
1
−7
−1
3
𝐸K +
≈
−
1.82
×
10
eV
s
cm
1+𝑧
1 + 𝐸 K /(𝑚 p 𝑐2 )

3.3.1 Cosmic ray sources
In previous studies, Sazonov & Sunyaev (2015) consider only Pop
III stars in low-mass halos as cosmic ray sources, whereas Leite et al.
(2017) consider all Pop II star-forming halos as sources, and Bera
et al. (2023) consider both. We encompass all these possibilities in
our model. Furthermore, to account for the fact that in some models
cosmic rays can only efficiently escape from low-mass halos (≲
max , and restrict the source of
107 M⊙ ), we introduce a parameter 𝑀cr
cosmic rays in our simulation to a user-specified stellar population(s)
max . In our simulations, we thus define the
in halos of mass less than 𝑀cr
max ),
cosmic ray emitting star formation rate density field, SFRDcr (𝑀cr
as the star formation rate density (in each simulation cell) of objects
max .
that emit cosmic rays and are hosted in halos of mass less than 𝑀cr
Due to the uncertainties in the fraction of stars that underwent
supernovae, supernova kinetic energy yields, the conversion rate of
this energy into cosmic rays, and the escape fraction into the IGM, we
max ) into a cosmic ray energy injection rate via a
convert SFRDcr (𝑀cr
combined efficiency factor 𝜂cr . In other words, 𝜂cr is formally defined
to be the proportionality constant between star formation rate and the
rate of cosmic ray energy injected into the IGM. Since massive stars
that undergo supernovae have short lives on cosmological timescales,
we ignore the time delay between star formation and supernovae in

9

2𝛽2 𝑑𝑡
,
× 𝑥HI 𝑛H [1 + 0.0185 ln(𝛽)Θ(𝛽 − 𝛽0 )] 3
𝛽0 + 2𝛽3 𝑑𝑧
(26)
which we can solve numerically to find the kinetic energy of a cosmic
ray emitted at redshift 𝑧0 with initial kinetic energy 𝐸 K,0 .
The above equation describes the temporal evolution of our cosmic
ray distribution but we also need the spatial distribution. Given the
large uncertainty in how cosmic rays move through the primordial
IGM, we consider several alternative models for the spatial distribution of cosmic rays about their source, 𝑃(x, 𝑧; 𝐸 K,0 , 𝑧0 ).
Physically, the furthest a cosmic ray could have reached from its
source is set by its comoving path length 𝑅, with the cosmic ray
free-streaming on a straight line path from its source. This can be
calculated by integrating
v
u
! −2
t
𝑑𝑅
𝐸K
= 𝑐(1 + 𝑧) 1 − 1 +
,
(27)
𝑑𝑡
𝑚 p 𝑐2

5

Note a momentum power-law spectrum was used in this study rather than
the kinetic energy power-law employed in this paper.
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

10

T. Gessey-Jones et al.

where 𝐸 K is in turn found by solving equation (26). Such a freestreaming scenario could occur if the IGM magnetic field is very
weak and so magnetic scattering of cosmic rays is rare. In this model
𝑃(x, 𝑧; 𝐸 K,0 , 𝑧0 ) would become a shell window function at a comoving distance 𝑅 from the origin. To gauge the length-scale of this
free-streaming propagation, which gives us the maximum possible
range of cosmic ray heating, we calculate the comoving path length
of protons when they are absorbed 𝑅abs . If the protons are not absorbed by 𝑧 = 6 we calculate their distance (at 𝑧 = 6) to the emission
source. The resulting values are depicted in Fig. 2a. We find lower
energy cosmic rays with initial kinetic energy ≲ 2 MeV travel less
than the length of one of our simulation cells, 𝐿 pix = 3 cMpc. Above
this energy threshold but below ∼ 200 MeV cosmic rays travel at
least a simulation cell length and up to 1000 cMpc while still being
absorbed before 𝑧 = 6. Therefore, we find that in principle cosmic
rays can travel far from the source distributing the energy as heat
over large cosmological scales (of the order of a few hundred cMpc).
Cosmic rays with higher initial energies (≳ 200 MeV) are not absorbed by 𝑧 = 6. From our comparison of energy-loss timescales in
subsection 2.3, we know for cosmic rays with 𝐸 K > 200 MeV their
energy losses are dominated by Hubble cooling. Hence, while these
highest-energy cosmic rays travel large (> 1 cGpc) cosmological distances they are not anticipated to contribute to cosmic ray heating
due to their energy being lost to the expansion of the universe.
For cosmic ray spectrum with the theoretically predicted exponent
of 𝛼cr = 2 the injected cosmic ray energy is split evenly over log initial
kinetic energy. Hence, the low energy cosmic rays with 𝐸 K ≲ 2 MeV
are anticipated to contain a significant fraction (30 per cent, using
the 𝐸 K,min and 𝐸 K,max of Sazonov & Sunyaev 2015) of the total
injected cosmic ray energy. Since these cosmic rays can only travel
short distances on cosmological scales we would thus anticipate that
even in this limiting case of free-streaming a substantial portion of
cosmic ray heating occurs within a few cMpc of the source halo,
and thus cosmic ray heating is likely strongly clustered around starforming halos. This localized nature of cosmic ray heating would
in turn suggest that the globally averaged models used in previous
works are insufficient to fully model the impact of cosmic ray heating
on the 21-cm signal. For comparison with other studies, we will
also consider a spatially uniform case of cosmic ray heating with
𝑃(x, 𝑧; 𝐸 K,0 , 𝑧0 ) being a constant. However, we note that this is not
a physically plausible model of cosmic ray propagation due to its
acausal nature.
The opposite logical extreme to free-streaming would be for cosmic rays to not escape their parent halos. This would correspond to
no cosmic ray heating of the neutral IGM, and hence no impact on the
21-cm signal (easily modelled by setting 𝜂cr = 0). However, cosmic
rays can escape the Milky Way (Schlickeiser 2002), a much larger
and thus harder to escape galaxy than those expected at high redshifts. In addition, Sazonov & Sunyaev (2015) argued that the Bohm
lower diffusivity bound showed cosmic ray heating should extend to
distances greater than the average separation between minihalos at
𝑧 ≤ 20. Similarly, detailed simulations by Jana & Nath (2018) of the
diffusion of cosmic rays out of individual halos led them to conclude
that cosmic ray heating from minihalos at 𝑧 = 10 and 𝑧 = 20 is homogeneous on inter-halo scales, even when the diffusivity of cosmic
rays is assumed to be two orders of magnitude less than is seen in the
Milky Way today. The physical expectation is thus that even in the
most confined scenarios some heating cosmic rays will escape into
the IGM.
Previous studies would thus indicate the minimum physically plausible range of cosmic ray heating is comparable to the inter-halo
distance at 𝑧 < 20. For our model of star formation, we find each
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

cell of our simulation should contain several star-forming halos at
𝑧 ≲ 20 (Reis et al. 2022). Hence for the epochs during which the
21-cm signal is driven by heating, the cosmic ray minimum range
is below the resolution of our simulations. As a result, in our shortest plausible range model, hereby called the locally-confined heating
model, cosmic ray heating should not travel between neighbouring
simulation cells, e.g. 𝑃(x, 𝑧; 𝐸 K,0 , 𝑧0 ) is 1 in the origin cell and 0
elsewhere.
In the locally-confined heating model the distribution of cosmic
ray heating thus needs to be handled by a sub-grid model. Motivated
by Jana & Nath (2018) we assume cosmic ray heating is uniform
within each cell in our locally-confined heating model. Note this is
not to say that the range of cosmic ray heating is the 3 cMpc size
of the simulation cell, but instead that the overlapping cosmic ray
heating regions around different star-forming halos within the cell
leads to approximately uniform heating of the IGM within the cell.
However, variations in heating rate between cells are still present
due to the differences in matter overdensity and hence star-forming
halo density from cell to cell. Furthermore, we assume the heating
is partitioned between the ionized and non-ionized phases of each
cell in proportion to their masses. In Section 4.4 we discuss the anticipated consequences of these assumptions breaking down, which
simulations by Jana & Nath (2018) indicate is likely around large
galaxies at redshifts lower than our simulations (𝑧 ∼ 4).
Short-ranged cosmic ray heating such as that we are attempting to describe via our locally-confined heating model would occur
if the high-redshift magnetic field in the IGM were strong. These
strong magnetic fields could either be primordial in nature or originating from weak seed fields amplified by structure formation (Sur
et al. 2010) and then expelled into the IGM via SNRs or galactic outflows (Samui et al. 2018). Cosmic rays may even somewhat
self-confine via the generation of magnetic fields through instabilities or the Biermann battery (Yokoyama & Ohira 2022), though the
former process is potentially inefficient in the neutral IGM due to
magnetosonic wave damping (Leite et al. 2017).
With the two propagation mechanisms (the locally-confined and
free-streaming models) bracketing the range of physically plausible
distributions for cosmic ray heating, we can now compute the cosmic
ray number density in a given cell of our simulation. We combine
the injection rate, equation (24), and the chosen propagation window
functions
 
∫ ∞
 𝛼cr 𝑑𝑡
𝑑 2 𝑁 (x, 𝐸 K , 𝑧)
𝜂cr
=
𝑑𝑧0 − 𝐸 K,0 (𝑧0 , 𝐸 K )
×
𝑑𝑉 𝑑𝐸 K
N (𝛼cr ) 𝑧
𝑑𝑧 z0



SFRDcr [x, 𝑧0 ] ∗ 𝑃[x, 𝑧; 𝐸 K,0 (𝑧 0 , 𝐸 K ), 𝑧0 ] ,
(28)
where ∗ is the spatial convolution, and 𝐸 K,0 (𝑧 0 , 𝐸 K ) is the initial
kinetic energy computed for a cosmic ray emitted at redshift 𝑧 0 which
has kinetic energy 𝐸 K at redshift 𝑧. The function 𝐸 K,0 (𝑧 0 , 𝐸 K ) being
defined implicitly as the solution to equation 26.

3.3.3 Heating and Ionization Rate
Finally, we need to convert 𝑑 2 𝑁 (𝐸 K , 𝑧)/𝑑𝑉 𝑑𝐸 K into cosmic ray
heating and ionization rates. By using the heating fractions 𝑓heat
defined in subsection 2.4 we can compute the cosmic ray heating rate
per baryon as


∫ 𝐸K,max
𝑓 (𝑥e )
𝑑𝐸 K
𝑑2 𝑁
𝜖cr = heat
𝑑𝐸 K −
,
(29)
𝑛b
𝑑𝑡 E&I 𝑑𝑉 𝑑𝐸 K
0

Cosmic Ray Heating and the 21-cm Signal

Absorbe

d by z =

102

102

6

101

101

100

Lpix
100

10−1
10−2
40

30

20

Emission Redshift z0

10

≤ 10−1

0.50

103
0.10
102

Absor

bed b
yz=

101

6

10−2

100

10−1
10−2
40

30

20

Emission Redshift z0

10

Fraction of EK,0 into Heat

103

(b) 104
Emission KE EK,0 [MeV]

≥ 103

Comoving Distance R [cMpc]

Emission KE EK,0 [MeV]

(a) 104

11

≤ 10−3

Figure 2. Comoving path length (panel a) of a cosmic ray proton at 𝑧 = 6 emitted at 𝑧0 with kinetic energy 𝐸K,0 , and the fraction of its initial kinetic energy
that is converted into the IGM heat (panel b). Here we have assumed the cosmic rays are moving in partially ionized IGM, with cosmic mean density and 𝑥e
taken from the reference simulation (subsection 4.1.1). The black line indicates the 𝐸K,0 below which a cosmic ray is fully absorbed before 𝑧 = 6. In panel
a, the side length of one of our simulation cells is indicated as a green dashed contour for a reference, showing that cosmic ray protons emitted with energies
below ∼ 2 MeV should not be able to escape their simulation cell of origin. Free-streaming cosmic rays emitted above ∼ 2 MeV but below ∼ 200 MeV can
travel between cells but are still absorbed before 𝑧 = 6, while protons with 𝐸K,0 > 200 MeV are never absorbed. As shown in panel b, low energy cosmic rays
(𝐸K,0 < 10 MeV) deposit a significant portion (> 10 per cent) of their initial kinetic energy as heat, with this fraction increasing with redshift due to the increase
in 𝑓heat with 𝑥e . Conversely, at 𝐸K,0 > 1000 MeV less than 0.1 per cent of a cosmic ray kinetic energy becomes heat in the IGM, at least by 𝑧 = 6.

where − 𝑑𝐸 K /𝑑𝑡| E&I is the rate of kinetic energy loss by a cosmic ray
proton to excitation and ionization interactions. This heating rate can
then simply be added to the sum of heating rates in equation (13) to
model cosmic ray heating in our simulations, with the corresponding
ionization rate from equation (8) used in equation (17). To properly
account for the dependence of heating on spatial variation of 𝑥 𝑒
(rather than using a globally averaged or fixed value like previous
works), we interpolate between the tabulated values of 𝑓heat for each
cell of our simulation individually.

With our full model established, we can now infer the energy
range of cosmic rays that dominate heating. For an individual cosmic
ray proton, we consider the fraction of its initial kinetic energy that
contributes to the IGM heating by 𝑧 = 6 (shown in Fig. 2b) assuming
the particles travel through the IGM of mean density and ionization
fraction. As has been found in previous studies (Sazonov & Sunyaev
2015), the resulting fraction of energy that ends up as IGM heat
is strongly dependent on the initial kinetic energy of the cosmic
ray proton. Protons with 𝐸 K,0 < 10 MeV deposit at least 10 per
cent of their initial energy, with this contribution rising to above
30 per cent at 𝑧 < 10 when the free electron fraction increases in
the course of reionization. Above 𝐸 K,0 = 10 MeV there is an initial
gradual decrease in the energy fraction; however, once the cosmic
rays have high enough 𝐸 K,0 to not be fully absorbed by 𝑧 = 6
the fraction rapidly falls below 1 per cent. At the highest energy
𝐸 K,0 > 1000 MeV less than 0.1 per cent of a cosmic ray initial
kinetic energy contributes to heat. If indeed the cosmic ray injected
spectrum has an exponent around −2, as is predicted by theory, these
results reaffirm the conclusions of Sazonov & Sunyaev (2015) and
Leite et al. (2017) that cosmic ray heating is dominated by lower
energy particles with < 30 MeV. However, we also find that cosmic
rays with much higher energies up to 200 MeV have a non-negligible
contribution, heating up the IGM on large scales out to ∼ 100 cMpc
away from their sources.

3.3.4 Summary of our cosmic ray model
For clarity let us summarise our final model for cosmic ray heating.
In our framework, cosmic rays are emitted from star-forming halos
max at a rate proportional to either the Pop
below a mass threshold 𝑀cr
II, Pop III, or the total star formation rate in that halo, as specified by
the user. Particles are injected into the IGM with an efficiency of 𝜂cr
(energy injection per star formation rate), with the injected cosmic
ray spectrum taking the form of a power-law in kinetic energy with
exponent 𝛼cr and lower/upper cutoff of 𝐸 K,min /𝐸 K,max . While in the
IGM, cosmic rays lose energy to Hubble cooling and excitation and
ionization interactions, as described by equation (26). Through these
processes they heat the IGM at a rate described via equation (29),
propagating outward via one of three mechanisms: globally uniform,
free-streaming, or locally-confined. This propagation is modelled via
equation (28) using the relevant transfer function: a uniform distribution, a spherical shell (equation 27), and 1 in the origin cell with
0 elsewhere respectively. Cosmic ray heating rate is then integrated
into our simulations by extending the sum in equation (13). The
model is flexible by construction with free parameters describing the
max , 𝜂 , 𝛼 , 𝐸
cosmic ray emitting population (𝑀cr
cr
cr
K,min , 𝐸 K,max )
and the propagation mechanisms (globally uniform, free-streaming,
locally-confined).
As discussed in Section 3.3.1 the efficiency of cosmic ray injection
into the IGM, 𝜂cr , is dependant on the fraction of stars that underwent
supernovae, supernova kinetic energy yields, the conversion rate of
this energy into cosmic rays, and the escape fraction of cosmic rays
into the IGM. The first two of these are highly sensitive to the initial
mass function of the stellar population of interest. Only higher mass
stars undergo supernovae, and the type and hence kinetic energy yield
of the supernovae is in turn mass dependent. In this study, we treat
𝜂cr as a free parameter and decouple it from our modelling of the
Pop III initial mass function due to the large uncertainty in the other
components of 𝜂cr . Future works that aim to constrain early universe
models with 21-cm signal data, could model the link between IMF
and 𝜂cr using appropriate conditional priors.
While a correspondence cannot always be made between our
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

12

T. Gessey-Jones et al.

model parameters and those of other works when it can be it is
instructive to consider the parameters used by previous studies. Here
for ease of comparison, we attempt to convert the parameters used in
various studies to the parameters used in our work, with the values
listed in Table. 2. Several of the previous studies consider one supernova of a given yield occurring per halo, which is then converted
into cosmic ray energy injected into the IGM with some efficiency
parameter or a combination thereof. To convert such values to 𝜂cr
we have assumed that this supernova is occurring in a ∼ 106 M⊙
halo, with a baryonic collapse fraction of 0.1 and a star formation
efficiency 𝑓∗ = 0.01. Another difference in modelling is the usage
of either kinetic energy or momentum power laws. When previous
studies have used momentum power laws, we convert their spectral exponents to equivalent kinetic energy power law exponents by
equating the proportion of cosmic ray energy that ends up in cosmic
rays with 𝐸 K < 30 MeV, since we anticipate these cosmic rays to
dominate heating. The parameter values listed in Table. 2 show that
the largest differences between previous works are in the values of
−1 . The discrep𝜂cr which varies between 1×1047 and 5×1049 erg M⊙
ancy arises due to the uncertainty in the initial mass function of high
redshift stellar populations (and thus type/frequency of supernovae),
the efficiency of conversion of supernovae kinetic energy to cosmic
rays, and the escape fraction of these cosmic rays into the IGM.
A further potential impact of cosmic rays at high redshift is positive
feedback on star formation via enhancing the H2 concentration (Stacy
& Bromm 2007; Jasche et al. 2007), however, we do not include
this effect in our simulations due to these results being refuted by
Hummel et al. (2016). We also do not include the negative feedback
from cosmic rays heating gas near the halos virial radius which might
suppress the rate of gas accretion onto the halo (Lacki 2015; Jana &
Nath 2018), as it is only efficient at low redshifts (𝑧 ≤ 4).
Finally and importantly, we do not include excess radio backgrounds from cosmic rays. Although Jana et al. (2019) demonstrated
that cosmic ray electrons in Pop III SNRs can produce an excess
radio background via synchrotron emission, their analysis assumed
an ambient magnetic field of 0.32 𝜇G at 𝑧 = 17 (equivalent to ∼ 1 nG
comoving). As we discussed earlier, such a strong magnetic field
might be too extreme as it is at the upper bound of the extremely
broad (11 orders of magnitude) range of the experimentally allowed
primordial magnetic field values. The excess radio background found
by Jana et al. (2019) scales as the magnetic field to the 8/5th power,
and so an order of magnitude lower magnetic field would reduce the
extra radio background relative to the CMB from 300 per cent to only
8 per cent. If we assume a comoving magnetic field of ≲ 0.01 nG
consistent with our treatment of Alfvén wave heating, the excess radio background from cosmic rays should be less than a per cent of
the CMB temperature at the redshifts of interest, and thus will have
negligible impact on the 21-cm signal (Sikder et al. 2023).

4 RESULTS
We now describe our findings regarding the impacts of cosmic ray
heating on 21-cm observables, splitting our investigations into four
main themes. First, in subsection 4.1 we explore the implications of
the short-range nature of cosmic ray heating on the 21-cm signal
and how this could be leveraged to distinguish a cosmic ray heated
IGM from an IGM heated by other mechanisms. Secondly, we discuss the biases introduced by assuming spatially uniform cosmic ray
heating in subsection 4.2. Thirdly in subsection 4.3, we compare
the efficiency of cosmic ray heating to X-ray heating. Finally, we
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

contrast the impact of cosmic ray heating with other high-redshift
astrophysical processes in subsection 4.5.

4.1 Impacts of cosmic ray heating clustering
Previously (subsection 3.3) we arrived at the same conclusions as
Sazonov & Sunyaev (2015); Leite et al. (2017); Jana & Nath (2018)
that cosmic ray heating is dominated by sub-relativistic protons and,
thus, is likely clustered around overdense regions. This is in contrast
to heating by X-ray sources (Furlanetto et al. 2006; Fialkov et al.
2014b; Pacucci et al. 2014) which affects the gas temperature on
large cosmological scales of several hundred cMpc. To isolate the
characteristic patterns of cosmic ray heating in the 21-cm signal
from the effects of other processes we compare models with similar
IGM thermal histories.
Our main case (reference model) is similar to the model considered by Leite et al. (2017), with cosmic rays emitted from all
star-forming halos regardless of population or mass (with parame−1 , 𝐸
−2
9
ters 𝜂cr = 1048 erg M⊙
K,min = 10 MeV, 𝐸 K,max = 10 MeV,
𝛼cr = −2) and assuming a free-streaming mode of cosmic ray propagation. We contrast this model with locally-confined cosmic ray heating, X-ray heating with a soft spectral energy distribution (SED), and
X-ray heating with a hard SED. In our simulations, a soft X-ray SED
is modelled as a truncated power-law with exponent −1.5 and lower
cutoff of 0.2 keV corresponding to a mean free path of ∼ 1.3 cMpc at
𝑧 = 15 (Furlanetto et al. 2006). The majority of X-ray photons in this
case have mean free paths of several cMpc and, thus, inject energy
relatively close to the sources (although are still longer-range compared to cosmic rays). The hard SED is modelled using a truncated
power-law with exponent −1 and lower-cutoff of 3 keV, corresponding to a mean free path of ∼ 4300 cMpc at 𝑧 = 15. In this case, most
photons travel large cosmic distances, lose most of their energy to
cosmic expansion and are hardly absorbed by the IGM. Therefore,
this model is expected to yield relatively uniform and weak heating.
For ease of comparison, we calibrate heating efficiency parameters (either 𝜂cr or 𝑓X 6 ) to achieve similar thermal histories between the models. We achieve this by minimizing the root-meansquare difference between the reference global 21-cm signal7 and
the global signals of each other model over the redshift range
𝑧 = 10 − 25. Through this procedure, we find signals with minimal differences as shown in Fig. 3. We find that the reference model
−1 produces a similar global signal and a simiwith 𝜂cr = 1048 erg M⊙
lar thermal history as the locally-confined cosmic ray heating model
−1 , soft X-rays with 𝑓 = 0.332 and
with 𝜂cr = 1.39 × 1048 erg M⊙
X
hard X-rays with 𝑓X = 60.0. For comparison, we note that 𝑓 𝑋 = 1
is the typical value calibrated to the present-day population of X-ray
binaries and taking into account the more efficient X-ray emission in
metal-poor environments of the high redshift universe (Fragos et al.
2013).
Closely comparing the matched global signals we see that the
high-redshift parts regulated by the onset of star formation and WF
coupling (𝑧 ∼ 25 − 35) are identical for all the calibrated models.
Small differences in the shapes of the signals arise at redshifts affected
by heating processes (𝑧 ∼ 10−20, we refer to this part of the signal as

6

All other astrophysical parameters (listed in Table 1) and cosmological
parameters, including the cosmological initial conditions, are kept the same
between the simulations.
7 We also considered minimizing the difference between average kinetic
temperatures and came to the same conclusions as we do here for matching
global 21-cm signals.

Cosmic Ray Heating and the 21-cm Signal

13

Table 2. Parameters used by previous comic ray heating studies converted into our notation, in order: the emitting stellar population, the maximum halos mass
max , the efficiency of cosmic ray emission 𝜂 , the exponent of the cosmic ray spectrum 𝛼 , and the minimum/maximum cutoff
cosmic rays can escape from 𝑀cr
cr
cr
of the cosmic ray spectrum 𝐸K,min /𝐸K,max . The propagation mechanism of cosmic rays is not included as all the previous studies assumed uniform heating,
with the exception of Jana & Nath (2018) who considered individual halos. Values marked with a red asterisk are approximate equivalents. If there is no close
equivalent value, or no value is given in the corresponding paper, we leave that table entry unpopulated (dash). Two separate sets of parameters are given for
Bera et al. (2023) as they model Pop II and Pop III stars separately. For ease of comparison, we also list the ranges of values used in our subsequent investigation
broken down by section.
Study
Sazonov & Sunyaev (2015)
Leite et al. (2017)
Jana & Nath (2018)
Jana et al. (2019)
Bera et al. (2023) (Pop II)
Bera et al. (2023) (Pop III)
Section 4.1
Section 4.2
Section 4.3
Section 4.5.1
Section 4.5.2

Emitting Pop.

max [M ]
𝑀cr
⊙

𝜂cr [erg M −1
⊙]

𝛼cr

𝐸K,min [MeV]

𝐸K,max [MeV]

III
II
III
II
III

107
∞
∞
∞

1 × 1047 to 5 × 1049 ∗
1 × 1048
6 × 1047
1.5 × 1049 ∗
3 × 1048
4 × 1048 ∗

−2
−1.74 to −1.94 ∗
−1.97 ∗
−1.84 ∗

10 −3
10 −2
0.1 and 1
10 −2

108
109
-

II + III
II + III
II + III
II + III
III

∞
∞
∞
∞
106 to 108

1 × 1048 to 1.39 × 1048
1 × 1048
1 × 1047 to 1 × 1049
1 × 1048
3 × 1048

−2
−2
−2
−1.7 to −2
−2

10 −2
10 −2
10 −2
10 −2
10 −3

109
109
109
109
108

4.1.1 Imprints of cosmic ray heating in 21-cm tomography

Frequency ν [MHz]
50

Global Signal hT21 i [mK]

25
0
−25
−50

100

150

CR locally-confined
CR free-streaming
X-ray soft SED
X-ray hard SED

−75

−100
−125
−150
35

30

25

20

15

10

Redshift z
Figure 3. Matched 21-cm global signals with different heating mechanisms.
The efficiency of cosmic ray/X-ray emission was tuned for the models to
minimize the root-mean-square error between their predicted global signals
and that of the reference free-streaming cosmic ray heating model with 𝜂cr =
48
−1
1048 erg M −1
⊙ . This procedure gave 𝜂cr = 1.39 × 10 erg M ⊙ for the locallyconfined cosmic ray heating model, 𝑓X = 0.332 for the soft SED X-ray
heating model, and 𝑓X = 60.0 for the hard SED X-ray heating model. All
other astrophysical parameters listed in Table 1 and cosmological parameters,
including the cosmological initial conditions, are kept the same between the
simulations. The four models show good agreement at 𝑧 > 22 as heating of
the IGM has yet to become significant, as well as in the heating arm of the
global signal around 𝑧 ∼ 15. Differences are still seen between models at the
global signal minimum and emission maximum. A vertical grey dashed line
is shown at 𝑧 = 16, illustrating the redshift at which we compare tomographic
21-cm maps, see Fig. 4.

the heating arm) suggesting that differences in the spatial distribution
of heating do not fully average out. In the following, to produce the
clearest visual comparison of heating signatures, we contrast signals
at 𝑧 = 16 when the four models have approximately equal global
signals ⟨𝑇21 ⟩ = 82–85 mK.

The 21-cm signal is sensitive to gas temperature and, therefore, the
character of the IGM heating is expected to be manifested in the
spatial distribution of the brightness temperature. To visualize the
differences in heating patterns between cosmic rays and X-rays we
begin by considering 21-cm tomography.
Fig. 4 shows slices of the gas temperature cubes at 𝑧 = 16 produced
by the four simulations outlined above, alongside the corresponding
slices of the 21-cm signal. As anticipated, the maps show that in cosmic ray heated models, the heating of the IGM is much more clustered
compared to the cases with X-ray heating. We see a sharp contrast between the localized high-temperature regions and the vast regions of
cooler gas, which is manifested in the 21-cm maps as regions of mild
emission signal and deep absorption. The contrast is the sharpest
for locally-confined cosmic ray heating as is expected given it has
the shortest range among the considered scenarios. As we consider
increasingly longer-ranged heating mechanisms (i.e. free-streaming
cosmic rays, X-ray heating with soft SED, and, finally, hard X-rays),
fluctuations in the gas temperature are reduced, and, consequently,
the brightness temperature maps show less contrast. Ultimately, in
the case of heating by hard X-rays (the rightmost column), the gas
temperature is nearly uniform and there are practically no visible
emission regions in the 21-cm maps. This trend is explained by the
increasingly larger mean free path of the energy carriers (either cosmic ray protons or X-ray photons). For X-ray heating to appear as
clustered as cosmic ray heating, the mean-free path of X-rays would
need to be at most ∼3 cMpc which at 𝑧 = 16 (and assuming neutral
IGM) corresponds to X-ray energies of ∼ 280 eV or lower. However,
high-redshift X-ray sources, such as X-ray binaries, are thought to
have much harder SEDs peaking at a few keV (Fragos et al. 2013;
Sartorio et al. 2023). Therefore, our simulations suggest that, if observed, the character of the heated regions in the 21-cm maps could
be used to probe the nature of the dominant heating mechanism, e.g.
distinguish between cosmic ray and X-ray heating.

4.1.2 Signatures of heating clustering in the 21-cm power spectrum
The 21-cm power spectrum is a signal targeted by radio interferometers including HERA (Abdurashidova et al. 2022), LOFAR (Mertens
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

14

T. Gessey-Jones et al.
CR Free-streaming

X-ray Soft SED

X-ray Hard SED

3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5

log10(TK [K])

Gas Temperature TK

CR Locally Confined

21-cm Signal T21

1.0
25
0

−50

T21 [mK]

−25

−75
0

100 200 300
Distance [cMpc]

0

100 200 300
Distance [cMpc]

0

100 200 300
Distance [cMpc]

0

100 200 300
Distance [cMpc]

−100

Figure 4. Slices of tomographic maps of the IGM gas temperatures (top) and the 21-cm signals (bottom) for different cosmic ray (CR) and X-ray heating
mechanisms shown at 𝑧 = 16 where all four simulations predict approximately the same global signal ⟨𝑇21 ⟩ ≈ −84 mK. From left to right the IGM heating
becomes more diffused as the heating carriers become longer-ranged (locally-confined CRs, free-streaming CRs, soft X-rays and hard X-rays). In addition, the
mean IGM gas temperature decreases from 20.5 K to 16.0 K, 13.4 K, and finally 12.4 K. The change in heating results in a reduced contrast between emitting
and absorbing regions in the 21-cm maps. All four simulations used the same cosmological initial conditions and the same slice of the simulation box is shown
in each case.

et al. 2020), MWA (Ewall-Wice et al. 2016), NenuFAR (Mertens
et al. 2021), and the future SKA (Koopmans et al. 2015). Examples
of the 21-cm power spectra for the models explored here are shown
in Fig. 5. We start by considering the redshift evolution of the power
spectra at a fixed comoving wavenumber 𝑘 = 0.1 cMpc −1 (panel a).
In general, we expect to see two well-defined peaks in the power
spectra vs redshift, one marking the dominance of fluctuations imprinted by the non-uniform WF coupling and the other reflecting the
gas temperature fluctuations prevailing at lower redshifts. We find the
power spectra produced by the two cosmic ray heating scenarios to be
very similar while being dramatically different from the X-ray heating scenarios. As a result of their localized strong heating, the two
cosmic ray models show clear narrow peaks due to the WF coupling
at 𝑧 ∼ 25 and heating at 𝑧 ∼ 15. In the soft X-ray SED case heating
is longer-range which results in a slight delay in energy injection, a
broader WF coupling peak and a factor of 1.8 lower heating peak.
Finally, in the hard X-ray SED case the Lyman-coupling peak is even
broader and the heating peak is completely erased owing to the large
mean free path of X-ray photons.
Next, we compare the shape of the signals as a function of
wavenumber 𝑘 at a fixed global signal value. For convenience, we
choose the value of ⟨𝑇21 ⟩ = −84 mK8 (which for all the models happens at 𝑧 ∼ 16) to show results for in panel b. The differences seen in
the shapes of the power spectra for various heating mechanisms are
much more striking than what we saw for the corresponding global
signals and can be understood in terms of the typical length scale
below which the structure is washed out. In the locally-confined cos-

8

The same comparison was performed for ⟨𝑇21 ⟩ = −50 mK and ⟨𝑇21 ⟩ =
−100 mK with similar conclusions reached.

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

mic ray heating, this length scale is at the resolution limit of our
simulation and so the spherical 21-cm power spectrum traces the
matter power spectrum across our entire 𝑘 range. For cosmic ray
free-streaming the heating length scale is larger leading to a suppression of the power spectrum above 𝑘 ∼ 0.2 cMpc −1 , which is
evident from the figure. In the case of X-ray heating, the high energy
particles (present even in the soft SED case) affect the shape of the
signal at a broad range of scales leading to a suppression of power.
The effect is visible even at the largest scales (smallest 𝑘) considered,
though the suppression remains strongest at smaller scales (high 𝑘).
Finally, since for the hard SED X-ray model the heating is nearly
uniform, the strong suppression of the power spectrum is observed
at all the considered scales. In summary, we find that the strongest
differences in the signatures of heating mechanisms are produced at
high 𝑘, with the locally-confined cosmic ray heated model having a
60 per cent, 420 per cent, and 1080 per cent larger power spectrum
than the free-streaming cosmic ray, soft X-ray SED, and hard X-ray
SED models respectively at 𝑘 = 0.5 cMpc −1 .
Our results suggest that a measurement of the 21-cm power spectrum at 𝑘 > 0.2 cMpc −1 during the heating-driven stage (𝑧 ∼ 10−20)
could be used to probe the dominant IGM heating mechanism.
Stronger signals at high 𝑘 values would indicate a more clustered
heating, allowing us to distinguish X-ray from cosmic ray heating,
and (if the environment was cosmic ray heated) the degree of confinement of cosmic ray particles. To illustrate the experimental feasibility of using the 21-cm power spectrum as such a diagnostic tool
we have included 1000 hr SKA thermal noise sensitivities (Koopmans et al. 2015) in Fig. 5, which yield signal-to-noise-ratios > 9 at
𝑘 = 0.5 cMpc −1 between each pair of models. In the heating-driven
era of the 21-cm signal the suppression of the 21-cm power spectrum above a length-scale set by the dominant heating mechanism

Cosmic Ray Heating and the 21-cm Signal
k = 0.1 cMpc−1

102

101
CR locally-confined
CR free-streaming
X-ray soft SED
X-ray hard SED
SKA 1000hr Noise

100
35

30

25

20

hT21 i = −84 mK

(b)
Power Spectrum ∆2 [mK2 ]

Power Spectrum ∆2 [mK2 ]

(a)

15

10

Redshift z

15

103

102

101
10−1

100

Wavenumber k [cMpc−1 ]

Figure 5. Comparison of the 21-cm power spectrum for the locally-confined cosmic rays, free-streaming cosmic rays, soft and hard X-rays (models are specified
in subsection 4.1.1). Panel (a) shows the redshift evolution of the 21-cm power spectrum at a fixed wavenumber 𝑘 = 0.1 cMpc −1 . Panel (b) shows the power
spectra versus wavenumber 𝑘 at the redshift when the corresponding global 21-cm signal equals to ⟨𝑇21 ⟩ = −84 mK (which occurs at 𝑧 ∼ 16 for all the
considered cases). We find that the small-scale (high 𝑘) 21-cm signal varies significantly between the models, suggesting that the variation of the 21-cm power
spectrum with 𝑘 could provide a diagnostic tool for the dominant heating mechanism. Also shown in both panels is the thermal-noise estimate for the SKA with
1000 hrs of observations (grey curve, Koopmans et al. 2015), illustrating the theoretical sensitivity of next-generation 21-cm power spectrum experiments.

is a generic effect, previously proposed by Fialkov et al. (2014b)
as a way to probe the SED of X-ray sources. Thus the potential to
distinguish the nature of high-redshift heating mechanisms based on
the shape of the high 𝑘 21-cm power spectrum should be robust to
astrophysical uncertainties, though the exact signal-to-noise ratios
will depend on the astrophysical scenario. Additionally, this analysis
does not consider experimental systematics, or any potential degeneracies with new physics such as properties of dark matter (Sitwell
et al. 2014; Barkana 2018; Muñoz et al. 2018; Fraser et al. 2018;
Fialkov et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019; Muñoz et al. 2020; Jones et al.
2021; Hibbard et al. 2022; Barkana et al. 2023), all of which could
weaken the ability for the high 𝑘 power spectrum to pin down the
dominant IGM heating mechanism. Given these uncertainties, further work is required to reliably evaluate the statistical significance
with which the nature of high-redshift heating mechanisms can be
determined from the projected 21-cm power spectrum measurements
of upcoming experiments.

4.2 Uniform heating assumption and the global signal
When attempting to match thermal histories between simulations (Fig. 3), we found that an exact correspondence between the
produced global signals could not be achieved in models with locallyconfined and free-streaming cosmic ray heating. The inevitable discrepancy suggests that the spatial distribution of IGM heating is
reflected in the global 21-cm signal due to ⟨𝑇21 ⟩ being a non-linear
tracer of 𝑇K . Given that previous studies assumed uniform cosmic
ray heating, rather than the theoretically expected highly clustered
behaviour, such an assumption may have biased the global signal
predictions in these works.
Here we investigate the degree to which the global signal is affected by the locality of heating. Unlike in the previous subsection,
here we do not attempt to match thermal histories between models, instead, we keep the cosmic ray emission efficiency parameter
−1 constant so that the energy injected into cosmic
𝜂cr = 1048 erg M⊙
rays that reach the IGM is the same between simulations. This allows
us to isolate the effect of the heating distribution by only varying

the cosmic ray propagation mode between locally-confined, freestreaming and globally uniform heating. All other parameters are
kept the same as for the reference model used in the previous subsection (and listed in Table 1). The 21-cm global signals predicted
for the three different cosmic ray propagation modes are shown in
Fig. 6.
As expected, the differences in the predicted global signals with
various heating mechanisms are manifested at redshifts affected by
heating (𝑧 ≲ 20), while the signals are identical at higher redshifts
dominated by the WF coupling. In the case of uniform heating, the
global signal evolution happens faster, preceding the other two models by Δ𝑧 ∼ 1. The uniform heating model also features a higher
and earlier emission maximum of ⟨𝑇21 ⟩ = 17.9 mK, at 𝑧 = 11 compared to ⟨𝑇21 ⟩ = 12.8 mK, at 𝑧 = 10 and ⟨𝑇21 ⟩ = 8.7 mK, at 𝑧 = 10
in the free-streaming and locally-confined cases respectively. While
the effect is smaller we also observe similar differences between the
free-streaming and locally-confined propagation modes.
Even though the energy of cosmic rays reaching the IGM is the
same in all cases, our results suggest that clustered heating is less
efficient at increasing the average 21-cm signal than uniform heating.
This is contrary to what would be expected from the mean IGM
kinetic temperature, which is found to be highest between 𝑧 = 13 and
20 for the locally-confined model, due to the correlations between star
formation and 𝑥e which increase the average efficiency with which
cosmic ray energy is deposited into the IGM as heat ( 𝑓heat ). The
non-linear relationship between ⟨𝑇21 ⟩ and 𝑇K explains the fact that
uniform heating is the most efficient at increasing ⟨𝑇21 ⟩. When the
WF coupling is efficient (𝑥 𝛼 ≫ 1) but before reionization becomes
significant (i.e. 𝑥HI ≈ 1), the 21-cm signal scales as 𝑇21 ∼ 1 −𝑇𝛾 /𝑇K .
From this concave functional dependence, we see that 𝑇21 saturates
at a positive value for 𝑇K ≫ 𝑇𝛾 but can take large negative values for
𝑇K ≪ 𝑇𝛾 . Consequently, when a volume average of 𝑇21 is taken the
weighting favours low 𝑇K . As a result, owing to the concentration of
heating into a small volume (that then saturates in 21-cm emission),
models with clustered IGM heating are less efficient at raising the
mean 𝑇21 signal than the models in which heating is distributed
evenly across the entire IGM. This explains our findings that the
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

T. Gessey-Jones et al.

16

Frequency ν [MHz]
Global Signal hT21 i [mK]

25
0
−25

Frequency ν [MHz]
100

150

IGM Temperature TK [K]

50
Locally-confined
Free-streaming
Globally uniform

−50
−75

−100
−125
35

30

25

20

15

10

50

103

102

100

150

Inefficient CR
Standard CR
Efficient CR
Inefficient X-ray
Standard X-ray
Efficient X-ray
Standard CR + X-ray

101
35

30

25

20

15

10

Redshift z

Redshift z

Figure 6. Global 21-cm signal for different cosmic ray propagation models.
All three models have the same cosmic ray emission efficiency and astrophysical parameters, and thus the energy in cosmic rays reaching the IGM is
the same between the models. At redshifts affected by heating (𝑧 ∼ 12 − 20),
the signal in the globally uniform cosmic ray heating model evolves faster
and reaches a higher emission peak than the other two propagation models.
Similar but smaller differences can also be seen between the free-streaming
and locally-confined models. These differences suggest that clustered heating
is less efficient than diffused heating at driving the 21-cm global signal into
emission.

Figure 7. Evolution of the volume-averaged IGM temperature outside of ionized bubbles for different heating mechanisms. Shown are the kinetic temperature for models with inefficient, standard, and efficient cosmic ray (CR) heat48
−1
49
−1
ing, corresponding to 𝜂cr = 1047 erg M −1
⊙ , 10 erg M ⊙ , and 10 erg M ⊙
respectively; inefficient, standard, and efficient X-ray heating, corresponding
to 𝑓X = 0.1, 1, and 10; as well as a model with both standard efficiency cosmic
ray heating (𝜂cr = 1048 erg M −1
⊙ ) and X-ray heating ( 𝑓X = 1). We find that at
standard efficiencies considered in the literature, cosmic ray heating heats up
the neutral IGM more rapidly than X-rays. However, as both mechanisms at
high redshifts are very uncertain, we advocate for the inclusion of both.

shorter range cosmic ray heating we consider the less effective the
heating appears to be at raising ⟨𝑇21 ⟩.
The assumption of uniform cosmic ray heating has thus somewhat biased the predictions of previous studies, with cosmic ray
heating appearing too effective at increasing the 21-cm global signal. It should be noted, however, that this effect is moderate with
the largest discrepancy being 34.6 mK at 𝑧 = 15, between locallyconfined and globally uniform heating mechanisms, comparable to
the 25 mK EDGES residuals (Bowman et al. 2018), though at a
potentially measurable level for future experiments (e.g. the 5 mK
sensitivity level projected for 2500 hours of REACH observations,
de Lera Acedo et al. 2022). Hence, this bias while present is not
anticipated to greatly impact the conclusions of previous studies.

We find that for the range of typical efficiencies considered in the
literature, cosmic rays are roughly as efficient as X-rays in heating
up the neutral IGM at 𝑧 < 20. Comparing the cosmic ray and X-ray
standard efficiencies that we adopt here, cosmic rays are found to be
slightly more efficient than X-rays at raising the temperature of the
IGM. Furthermore, we see the temperature for the simulation with
both cosmic ray heating and X-ray heating modelled is noticeably
above that of the simulations with the standard efficiency heating
mechanisms modelled individually. This fact is a manifestation of
the comparable heating rates and shows that for some plausible efficiency parameter values, neither heating mechanism dominates and
modelling of both is required to produce an accurate thermal history.
This comparison indicates the potential importance of cosmic ray
heating to the modelling of the 21-cm signal.

4.3 Comparison of heating efficiencies
So far we have considered simulations with either cosmic ray heating or X-ray heating active. However, in reality, both mechanisms
will take place simultaneously. Here we contrast the two processes
to gain insight as to under which circumstances each process would
have a dominant contribution to thermal history. We consider three
simulations modelling cosmic ray heating only, with inefficient
−1 ), standard (𝜂 = 1048 erg M −1 ), or efficient
(𝜂cr = 1047 erg M⊙
cr
⊙

−1 ) cosmic ray emission, and a further three sim(𝜂cr = 1049 erg M⊙
ulations modelling X-ray heating only, with inefficient ( 𝑓X = 0.1),
standard ( 𝑓X = 1), or efficient ( 𝑓X = 10) X-ray emission which use
the X-ray SED calculated by Fragos et al. (2013) for early universe
X-ray binaries. One should keep in mind that the selected efficiencies
are illustrative and both heating processes are subject to orders of
magnitude uncertainties. For comparison, we also consider a seventh
simulation with both standard efficiency cosmic ray heating and standard X-ray heating modelled. All other parameters of these simulations are the same as the reference simulation from subsection 4.1.1.
The predicted evolution of the volume-averaged IGM temperature
outside of ionized bubbles for these simulations is shown in Fig. 7.

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

4.4 Sub-grid clustering of cosmic ray heating
In the above, motivated by the findings of Jana & Nath (2018), we
have assumed that cosmic ray heating is uniform within simulation
cells. However, this assumption is not expected to hold around massive galaxies at 𝑧 ∼ 4 (Jana & Nath 2018) and may break down at
𝑧 > 20 when there is a greater distance between star-forming halos.
If the assumption were not valid, we would be artificially smoothing
cosmic ray heating, and thus the 21-cm signal, on the scale of the
resolution of our simulations. It is thus necessary to consider the
impact on our conclusions of clustering of cosmic ray heating on
scales smaller than our resolution.
There are two main impacts of sub-grid heating clustering to consider the inhomogeneity of the temperature of the neutral IGM within
a cell, and the proportion of cosmic ray heat deposited into the ionized
IGM. In section 4.2, we previously discussed how increased inhomogeneity in the temperature of the IGM reduces the effectiveness of a
heating mechanism at raising the 21-cm global signal, thereby delaying the rise out of the global signal absorption trough (see Fig. 6). The
theoretical explanation for this phenomenon ultimately stems from

Cosmic Ray Heating and the 21-cm Signal
the non-linear relationship between 𝑇21 and 𝑇K , and so will also
apply to these subgrid scales. Hence sub-grid clustering of heating
would lead to a slower rise of the 21-cm global signal post absorption
minimum compared to our current models with the same 𝜂cr . Consequently, a higher 𝜂cr would be needed to match cosmic ray heating
scenarios to X-ray heating scenarios as we did in Section 4.1.1. Additionally, we would expect the trends seen when comparing 21-cm
tomographic maps in Section 4.1.1 to continue, with more clustered
heating leading to greater contrast in the 21-cm maps around radiative sources and larger voids with nearly uniform 21-cm signal. As
a result, the wavenumber above which the 21-cm power spectrum is
suppressed would now be set by the sub-grid length scale at which
cosmic ray heating is clustered, leading the 21-cm power spectrum
to trace the matter power spectrum to even higher wavenumbers than
were seen in our locally-confined case.
If heating is clustered around sources such that the heating of the
IGM between them is not approximately uniform, then we would
also anticipate a greater proportion of the cosmic ray energy to be
deposited in the ionized regions close to the sources. This is in contrast to our current assumption that heating in a cell is split between
the ionized and non-ionized IGM in proportion to their masses. Since
fully-ionized regions have zero 21-cm signal this would further diminish the efficiency of cosmic ray heating at raising the 21-cm
signal from its minimum. However, providing that cosmic rays can
still escape the ionized regions surrounding galaxies the length scale
at which the 21-cm power spectrum begins to deviate from tracing
the matter power spectrum will still be set by the heating length
scale. As a result, as long as there is still a well-defined heatingdriven era of the 21-cm signal the 21-cm power spectrum should
provide a diagnostic tool for probing the heating mechanism through
its characteristic length scale.
Hence, overall we find that should cosmic ray heating not be
uniform within cells we would expect a greater contrast in 21-cm
signal tomographic maps near sources and larger unheated voids
with nearly uniform 21-cm signal away from sources. In addition,
we anticipate there would be a slower increase in the 21-cm global
signal, and the 21-cm power spectrum would deviate from the matter
power spectrum at higher wavenumbers. These three changes would
serve to enhance our conclusions that X-ray heating and cosmic
ray heating can be distinguished using the small-scale 21-cm power
spectrum, and that assuming globally uniform cosmic ray heating
makes cosmic ray heating erroneously efficient at raising the 21-cm
signal.

4.5 Sensitivity to astrophysics
In the previous subsections, we considered models with a fixed set of
astrophysical parameters listed in Table 1, and only varied the type
of the IGM heating, cosmic ray propagation model, and emission
efficiencies. However, both the cosmic ray heating mechanism and the
astrophysical parameters of the early universe are highly uncertain.
In this subsection, we consider how the strength and behaviour of
cosmic ray heating vary when varying other astrophysical parameters
of the model. Throughout this subsection, all simulations have cosmic
ray heating, Ly 𝛼 heating and CMB heating enabled, X-ray heating
disabled, and use the free-streaming propagation model for cosmic
rays.

4.5.1 Diffusive escape

17

We start by considering models of cosmic ray heating similar
to that proposed by Leite et al. (2017), with cosmic rays emitted by all stellar populations from all star-forming halos assuming
−1 , 𝐸
−2
9
𝜂cr = 1048 erg M⊙
K,min = 10 MeV, 𝐸 K,max = 10 MeV and
𝛼cr = −2. As all stellar populations are emitting cosmic rays in this
model, we anticipate heating to be dominated by Pop II stars given
their greater star formation rate at later times. We thus consider the
variation of the 21-cm signal with the parameters that determine the
efficiency and timing of Pop II star formation, 𝑓∗,II and 𝑡 recov respectively. In addition, we seek to verify the finding of Leite et al. (2017)
that cosmic ray heating is quite sensitive to the spectral exponent of
the cosmic ray spectrum by varying 𝛼cr as well. To isolate the impacts of the variation in each one of the aforementioned parameters
we show 𝑇K and the 21-cm signal as separate columns in Fig. 8 for
different values of 𝑓∗,II , 𝑡recov and 𝛼cr .
As expected, increasing the Pop II star formation efficiency increases the rate of cosmic ray heating in our simulations. Thus as
𝑓∗,II rises from 0.002 to 0.2 we find the redshift of 𝑇K −𝑇cmb equality
moves to higher redshifts, from 𝑧 = 9.9 to 𝑧 = 15.4, and the temperature of the IGM at 𝑧 = 8 increases from 40 to 1070 K. This faster
heating of the IGM is reflected in the 21-cm signal with higher 𝑓∗,II
leading to a shallower absorption trough shifted to higher redshifts
and a stronger emission peak. Similarly, as 𝑓∗,II increases the power
spectrum heating peak shifts to higher redshifts and is stronger.
The effect of 𝑡recov is found to be more modest. Higher values of the
recovery time delay the onset of IGM heating by Δ𝑧 ∼ 1. As a result,
for the range of 𝑡 recov considered here, the IGM always reaches a
similar temperature of 257 to 291 K at 𝑧 = 8. These small shifts in the
IGM thermal history lead to small changes in the 21-cm global signal
and power spectrum with 𝑡 recov = 100 Myr having a global signal
minimum and power spectrum heating maximum at corresponding
delays of Δ𝑧 = 1 and Δ𝑧 = 2 compared to the equivalent features for
𝑡 recov = 10 and 30 Myr. The discrepancies in the 21-cm signals for
the explored 𝑡recov values are similar to, if smaller in magnitude than,
the differences seen by Magg et al. (2022b) when they considered
the same parameter variation assuming X-ray heated models. The
smaller differences observed in our work can be attributed to the
cosmic ray heating being less efficient than the X-ray heating in
Magg et al. (2022b). Additional effect comes from our updated LW
feedback prescription discussed earlier (see subsection 3.2).
Our simulations are found to support the finding of Leite et al.
(2017) that cosmic ray heating is quite sensitive to the spectral exponent 𝛼cr of the cosmic rays injected into the IGM. The aforementioned
𝑇K > 250 K at 𝑧 = 8 is achieved for a spectrum flat in log(𝐸 K ) with
𝛼cr = −2. As 𝛼cr increases a greater portion of the cosmic ray energy
is in the form of higher energy cosmic rays (𝐸 K > 200 MeV), which
as we found previously do not efficiently transfer their energy to the
neutral IGM. Consequently, the efficiency of cosmic ray heating decreases quite sharply as 𝛼cr increases, with 𝑇K only exceeding 𝑇CMB
at 𝑧 = 7.4 in the case of an exponent with 𝛼cr = −1.7. The decrease in
heating efficiency with 𝛼cr leads to deeper absorption troughs shifted
to lower redshifts and the gradual elimination of the power spectrum
heating peak.
The strong dependence of the efficiency of cosmic ray heating
on the spectrum of the injected cosmic rays suggests that accurate
modeling of the escape mechanism is required to understand the role
of cosmic rays in thermal history. Such simulations are made more
challenging by the uncertainty in the strength of magnetic fields in
the early universe and the nature of the astrophysical population in the
first star-forming halos (Jana & Nath 2018). Detection of cosmic ray
heating through 21-cm observations would thus potentially provide
insight into the magnetic field environment within the star-forming
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

T. Gessey-Jones et al.

18

IGM Temperature TK [K]

103

Pop II SFE f∗,II

Recovery Time trecov

f∗,II = 0.002

αcr = −1.7
αcr = −1.8
αcr = −1.9
αcr = −2
TCMB

trecov = 10 Myr
trecov = 30 Myr
trecov = 100 Myr
TCMB

f∗,II = 0.005

102

CR Exponent αcr

f∗,II = 0.02
f∗,II = 0.05
f∗,II = 0.2
TCMB

Global Signal hT21 i [mK]

101

0

−50

−100

Power Spectrum ∆2 [mK2 ]

−150
k = 0.1 cMpc−1

k = 0.1 cMpc−1

k = 0.1 cMpc−1

102

101

100

30

20

Redshift z

10

30

20

Redshift z

10

30

20

10

Redshift z

Figure 8. Variation of the IGM temperature and the 21-cm signal with astrophysical and cosmic ray parameters for diffusive escape cosmic rays. The kinetic
temperature of the IGM (top row), the global 21-cm signal (middle row), and the 21-cm power spectrum at 𝑘 = 0.1 cMpc −1 (bottom row) are shown for varying
Pop II star formation efficiency 𝑓∗,II (left column), recovery time between Pop III and Pop II star formation 𝑡recov (middle column), and exponent of the cosmic
ray spectrum 𝛼cr (right column). 𝑓∗,II is found to have a strong impact on the rate of the IGM heating and thus the 21-cm signal. We find an increase in the
star formation efficiency from 0.002 to 0.2 results in the IGM temperature at 𝑧 = 8 raising from 39.7 to 1070 K. Conversely, 𝑡recov is found to only have a small
impact. Larger values of 𝑡recov delay Pop II star formation and thus the IGM heating, leading to Δ𝑧 ∼ 1 shifts in the 21-cm global signal and power spectrum
across the range of 𝑡recov considered. The depicted variations with 𝛼cr replicate the findings of Leite et al. (2017) that the cosmic ray heating rate is quite sensitive
to the spectral shape of the cosmic rays injected into the IGM, with increasing 𝛼cr from −2 to −1.7 reducing the 𝑧 = 8 IGM temperature from 284 to 19 K, and
annihilating the power spectrum heating peak.

regions prior to reionization, as we would be able to test whether or
not the low-energy cosmic rays were able to escape from their parent
halos.

4.5.2 Direct injection
Until now we have assumed cosmic rays can escape from halos of any mass following the diffusive escape model discussed in
subsection 2.2. However, Sazonov & Sunyaev (2015) proposed an
intriguing alternative wherein cosmic rays are released directly into
the IGM due to the energetic SNRs of Pop III stars escaping their
fully photoevaporated host halos. Since in this mechanism the SNR
has to escape the host halo for cosmic rays to be directly injected into
the IGM, this sets an upper limit on the mass of star-forming halos
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

that contribute to cosmic ray heating, which in their work Sazonov
& Sunyaev (2015) take as 107 M⊙ .
To allow for easier comparison between our findings and those
of Sazonov & Sunyaev (2015) in this subsection we assume cosmic
rays can only be injected into the IGM by Pop III stars, turn off
X-ray heating, and adopt the same values for 𝐸 K,min = 10 −3 MeV,
𝐸 K,max = 108 MeV, and 𝛼cr = −2 as in their work. As reference
max = 107 M , to match the aforementioned study,
values we take 𝑀cr
⊙
−1 , which is in the middle of the
and use 𝜂cr = 3 × 1048 erg M⊙
range considered by Sazonov & Sunyaev (2015). Since in this model
cosmic rays are sourced from Pop III star supernovae, we consider the
variation in cosmic ray heating with Pop III star formation efficiency
𝑓∗,III and the strength of the LW feedback (set by the delay parameter
𝑝 LW , see Fialkov et al. 2013) due to the LW feedback impacting the
minimum halo mass in which Pop III stars can form. Finally, we also
consider the sensitivity of this model to its unique feature, the halo

Cosmic Ray Heating and the 21-cm Signal
mass threshold below which cosmic rays can escape into the IGM
max . Similarly to the last section, we calculate the IGM kinetic
𝑀cr
temperature, global 21-cm signal, and power spectrum for variations
of these three parameters and show the results in Fig. 9.
For many of the parameter values we consider, including our fiducial values, an unexpectedly complex redshift evolution of the IGM
kinetic temperature occurs. Rather than the familiar picture in which
the gas temperature is driven by monotonic heating preceded by adiabatic cooling (as we found in the previous subsection Fig. 8), the
direct injection models develop a local peak in the gas temperature
at 𝑧 ∼ 10 − 20. In scenarios with the aforementioned complex 𝑇K
evolution, we find adiabatic cooling initially dominates the IGM temperature evolution (as expected). Around the first minimum in gas
temperature (𝑧 ≳ 20) cosmic ray heating becomes efficient causing
the kinetic temperature to rise. However, soon after cosmic ray heatmax due to the LW
ing becomes efficient, 𝑀mol,crit rises above 𝑀cr
feedback (which was not modelled in Sazonov & Sunyaev (2015),
hence they did not observe this unusual behaviour). Consequently,
cosmic rays can no longer escape from star-forming halos, and so
cosmic ray heating of the IGM is cut off. Adiabatic cooling thus
begins to dominate the IGM temperature evolution for the second
time in cosmic history, the IGM temperature drops creating a local
maximum in the thermal history. Finally, Ly 𝛼 heating becomes efficient at later times causing the secondary minimum in 𝑇K as the
IGM temperature rises. Ly 𝛼 heating remains efficient for the rest of
our simulation resulting in a further monotonically increasing gas
temperature.
In Fig. 9 we explore how this peculiar behaviour changes with the
efficiency of the LW feedback. The differences primarily come from
the fact that 𝑝 LW regulates the redshift at which 𝑀mol,crit exceeds the
maximal halo mass for cosmic ray escape. As we increase 𝑝 LW the
max earlier. ConLW feedback is stronger and so 𝑀mol,crit exceeds 𝑀cr
sequently, the peak in gas temperature is shifted to earlier times and
is lower due to the shorter phase of cosmic ray heating. Curiously, the
presence of the peak in 𝑇K is manifested in the global 21-cm signal as
an additional inflexion point (marked by black crosses in Fig. 9). We
find that an earlier and weaker peak in 𝑇K in simulations with larger
𝑝 LW values leads to the inflexion point moving to higher redshifts.
In addition, models with stronger LW feedback (larger 𝑝 LW ) produce
deeper global 21-cm signals due to less efficient cosmic ray heating.
This effect is also manifested in the power spectra as enhanced power
at and around the heating peak.
max affects the shape of the
Next, we explore how changing 𝑀cr
max increases the redshift at
signals. Decreasing the free parameter 𝑀cr
max thus leading to an earlier cut-off of cosmic
which 𝑀mol,crit = 𝑀cr
max ∼ 106 M ,
ray heating. For the lowest explored value of 𝑀cr
⊙
cosmic ray heating is cut-off very early (at 𝑧 > 20) and before its
rate can exceed the adiabatic cooling rate. As a result, in this model,
the IGM continues to cool down adiabatically until Ly 𝛼 heating
becomes efficient at 𝑧 ∼ 13. The resulting thermal history is standard
(without visible local maximum/minima). This picture qualitatively
max rises above ∼ 107 M . In such scenarios, cosmic
changes as 𝑀cr
⊙
ray heating is efficient for a sufficient amount of time to imprint
changes in thermal history. At extremely high values of 𝑀mol,crit
(at and above ∼ 108 M⊙ ) cosmic ray heating becomes the dominant
mechanism and is not cut off even by 𝑧 = 8. In this simulation the
resulting IGM temperature is monotonically rising after the onset
of cosmic ray heating without developing any unexpected features.
The resulting 21-cm global signal and power spectrum are also quite
max with low values (𝑀 max = 106 M )
sensitive to the choice of 𝑀cr
⊙
cr
resulting in a deep and late absorption trough (−158 mK at 𝑧 = 17).

19

Owing to the absence of efficient cosmic ray heating in this case the
heating peak in the power spectrum is very weak. For the intermediate
max ∼ 107 M ) we find a more complex behaviour with
values (𝑀cr
⊙
additional inflexion points in the global 21-cm signal between 𝑧 = 20
and 10 and an enhanced power spectrum peak. Finally, as expected
from the thermal history, the highest explored values (108 M⊙ ) with
efficient heating result in an earlier and shallower absorption trough
(−111 mK at 𝑧 = 20) and a well-defined power spectrum heating
peak.
The impact of 𝑓∗,III on the 21-cm signal is more complex than
for the other two explored parameters since it affects both the rate
of cosmic ray heating and the strength of the LW background. In
our simulations, we find the local peak in 𝑇K occurring for models
with 𝑓∗,III ≳ 0.02, while models with lower values of 𝑓∗,III feature
a flattened extended 𝑇K minimum. This dependence illustrates that
the stronger LW feedback, and thus the earlier cut-off of cosmic
ray heating (e.g., from more vigorous Pop III star formation), is not
sufficient to fully counteract the more efficient cosmic ray heating
resulting from the higher Pop III star formation efficiency. As a
result, we observe an earlier but higher 𝑇K peak as 𝑓∗,III increases
(in the regime 𝑓∗,III ≳ 0.02). Consequently, higher 𝑓∗,III values lead
to earlier and slightly shallower absorption troughs with inflexion
points at progressively higher redshifts owing to the increasingly
more efficient cosmic ray heating. On the other hand, we find that
inefficient Pop III formation with the values 𝑓∗,III < 0.005 results
in a deep global 21-cm signal with no additional inflexion point.
The power spectrum trends are somewhat simpler, with higher 𝑓∗,III
leading to earlier and stronger peaks from both the increased Ly 𝛼
emission (peak at 𝑧 > 20) and the more efficient heating (peak at
12 < 𝑧 < 17). We observe no apparent new behaviour in the power
spectra, unlike in 𝑇K and ⟨𝑇21 ⟩, around 𝑓∗,III ∼ 0.02.
We find that indeed direct injection of cosmic rays can heat up
the IGM. However, we do not find this particular model of cosmic
ray heating to be as efficient as in the original study by Sazonov
& Sunyaev (2015). In part, this can be attributed to differences in
star formation prescription, the relaxation of the global heating assumption that we introduced here, and the truncation of cosmic ray
heating by the LW feedback. Consequently, whereas Sazonov & Sunyaev (2015) found cosmic rays to heat the IGM by 10 to 100 K at
𝑧 = 15, in our simulations 10 K of heating at 𝑧 = 15 is only achieved
for high values of star formation rates ( 𝑓∗,III ≥ 0.02) or high escape
max ≥ 107 M ) with the largest 𝑧 = 15 tempermass thresholds (𝑀cr
⊙
ature increase above the adiabatic cooling solution Δ𝑇K = 20.3 K
max = 108 M . While the amount of heat deposited
achieved for 𝑀cr
⊙
into the IGM by cosmic rays is found to be smaller than in Sazonov &
Sunyaev (2015), the 21-cm signal is still sensitive to this mechanism.
Our results suggest that the 21-cm signal could provide a probe of
the nature of Pop III star supernovae through the small amount of
cosmic ray heating which they produce around 𝑧 = 15 − 20.
To recap, we find that the direct injection model can lead to a rich
IGM thermal history and unusual features in the 21-cm signal. Above
we showed that the shape of the global signal undergoes a qualitative
max = 106 to
transition as the maximal halo mass changes from 𝑀cr
7
10 M⊙ . A new inflexion point is developed as a manifestation of the
complex heating history owing to the contribution of cosmic rays.
Now we consider this transition in more detail by densely sampling
max . We run the code 50 times with equal logarithmic
the parameter 𝑀cr
max
spacing in 𝑀cr in the range 106 − 107 . The results for 𝑇K and ⟨𝑇21 ⟩
are shown in Fig. 10.
Examining the resulting thermal histories we find a clear peak in
max = 107 M , the upper end of our considered
temperature for 𝑀cr
⊙
max
range. As 𝑀cr decreases, the peak shifts to higher redshifts and
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

T. Gessey-Jones et al.

20

IGM Temperature TK [K]

103

102

Pop III SFE f∗,III

LW Strength pLW

f∗,III = 0.002

pLW = 0.5

f∗,III = 0.02

pLW = 0.6

f∗,III = 0.2

pLW = 0.7

f∗,III = 0.005

pLW = 0.55

f∗,III = 0.05

pLW = 0.65

TCMB

pLW = 0.75

CR Max. Halo Mass Mcrmax
max
Mcr
= 106 M
max
Mcr
= 106.5 M
max
Mcr
= 107 M
max
Mcr
= 107.5 M
max
Mcr
= 108 M

TCMB

TCMB

k = 0.1 cMpc−1

k = 0.1 cMpc−1

Global Signal hT21 i [mK]

101

0

−50

−100

Power Spectrum ∆2 [mK2 ]

−150
k = 0.1 cMpc−1
102

101

100

30

20

Redshift z

10

30

20

Redshift z

10

30

20

10

Redshift z

Figure 9. Variation of the IGM temperature and the 21-cm signal with astrophysical and cosmic ray parameters for the direct injection cosmic rays model. The
kinetic temperature of the IGM (top row), the global 21-cm signal (middle row), and the 21-cm power spectrum at 𝑘 = 0.1 cMpc −1 (bottom row) are shown
for varying Pop III star formation efficiency 𝑓∗,III (left column), LW feedback delay parameter 𝑝LW (middle column), and maximum halo mass cosmic rays can
max (right column). Some of the models are found to display a complex thermal history, with a maximum and a secondary minimum in 𝑇 . The
escape from 𝑀cr
K
max . This is due to the maximum being caused by 𝑀
height and redshift of this 𝑇K maximum are found to be quite sensitive to 𝑝LW and 𝑀cr
mol,crit (the critical
max by the LW feedback. Due to the LW feedback cutting off cosmic ray heating, we
halo mass for molecular cooling star formation) being increased above 𝑀cr
do not find it to be as efficient as was found in the previous study (Sazonov & Sunyaev 2015). These complex IGM thermal histories in turn produce unusual
inflexion points in the heating arm of the 21-cm signal (marked with black crosses), which we explore further in Fig. 10.

lower temperature values. Eventually, the local maximum merges
with the higher redshift minimum transforming into two inflexion
points that can be seen in the highlighted signal (black line) corremax = 4.57 × 106 M . For lower values of the critical
sponding to 𝑀cr
⊙
mass, thermal evolution shows the classical behaviour driven by the
adiabatic cooling and Ly 𝛼 heating, with no extra features and no
clear sign of cosmic ray heating.
Considering the effect on the global 21-cm signal, we see that as
max decreases the inflexion point shifts to higher redshifts. Eventu𝑀cr
ally, the inflexion point merges with the minimum of the absorption
trough producing a flattened profile (black line in the right panel of
max even further, the absorption
Fig. 10). As we reduce the value of 𝑀cr
trough becomes deeper, narrower, and is no longer flattened.
Intriguingly, the flattened absorption feature that we find for
max = 4.57 × 106 M has a similar shape to the disputed EDGES
𝑀cr
⊙
Low Band detection of the global signal (Bowman et al. 2018) which
has a flattened minimum at a similar redshift. We note, however,
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

that cosmic ray heating cannot provide a self-consistent explanation
of the EDGES best-fit signal on its own as the resulting absorption
trough does not have the required depth or the steep sides observed by
EDGES. However, it does illustrate that such flattened global signals
are not inherently pathological and can be achieved in models with
two separate heating mechanisms, one active at higher redshifts and
only mildly pre-heating the IGM and the other representing a more
sustained heating that becomes efficient at later times (such as X-ray
heating, Ly 𝛼 or CMB heating). The high-redshift preheating could
be achieved also in other models such as e.g., fractional annihilating
dark matter with a cross-section that decreases with time (Liu &
Slatyer 2018).

5 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have developed a model of cosmic ray heating for
use in semi-numerical 21-cm signal simulations. Unlike previous

Cosmic Ray Heating and the 21-cm Signal
150

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
30

50

100

150

0

106.8

−25
−50

106.6

−75

−100

106.4

−125

106.2

−150

25

20

15

107

10

Redshift z

30

25

20

15

10

106

max
CR Max. Halo Mass Mcr
[M ]

20

Frequency ν [MHz]

100

Global Signal hT21 i [mK]

IGM Temperature TK [K]

Frequency ν [MHz]
50

21

Redshift z

Figure 10. Flattened global 21-cm signal minimum from the cosmic ray heating cut off. Variation of the IGM kinetic temperature and the global 21-cm signal
max = 107 M ,
is shown colour-coded with respect to the maximum halo mass that cosmic rays can escape from. At the highest end of the range considered, 𝑀cr
⊙
max is decreased the 𝑇
𝑇K develops a local peak due to the contribution of cosmic rays to heating. In turn, an inflexion point appears in the global signal. As 𝑀cr
K
maximum merges with the first minimum, and the inflexion point in the global signal coincides with the minimum of the absorption trough producing a flattened
max = 4.57 × 106 M (highlighted in black). For lower values of the critical mass, the global signal minimum gets narrower and deeper
absorption feature at 𝑀cr
⊙
and is no longer flattened as cosmic ray heating becomes insignificant.

globally-averaged models our approach includes realistic modelling
of the spatial distribution of cosmic ray heating. We bracket the
range of possible cosmic ray heating scenarios by considering freestreaming versus locally-confined models of particle propagation,
exploring the dependence of heating on the cosmic ray energy spectrum, and considering different channels for escape from host halos.
Our method thus allows us to perform the first investigations of the
signatures of this heating mechanism in 21-cm tomographic maps
and power spectra, as well as the previously studied global 21-cm
signal. It also enables us to compare the contribution of cosmic rays
to the thermal history of the IGM to other heating mechanisms, such
as X-ray heating, and thus to propose novel methods to potentially
distinguish an X-ray heated IGM from a cosmic-ray heated IGM
using upcoming observations.
We find the spatial range of cosmic ray heating to be much shorter
than that of X-ray heating, even when cosmic rays are assumed to
travel along straight lines. This short-range nature manifests in the
IGM heating being clustered around regions of efficient star formation and results in a sharp contrast in the 21-cm signal between
localized heated regions of emission and vast unheated regions of
absorption.
Comparing our inhomogeneous cosmic ray heating model to a uniform model commonly used in the literature, we find that its localized
nature results in a slightly delayed evolution of the global 21-cm signal. This demonstrates the existence of a small assumption-induced
bias in the results of previous globally-averaged studies. Much larger
differences are seen in the power spectra and tomographic maps,
as with cosmic rays as a dominant heating source the 21-cm signal
traces matter fluctuations to smaller scales than in the case of X-rays.
Specifically, we find that the 21-cm power spectrum at higher 𝑘 is
increasingly suppressed for the longer-ranged heating mechanisms
allowing us to constrain the propagation mechanism of cosmic ray
particles and distinguish cosmic ray from X-ray heating. Any clustering of cosmic ray heating on scales smaller than our simulation
resolution would enhance these effects and thus strengthen our conclusions. The potential of the high-𝑘 end of the power spectrum to
provide information about the spatial range of the dominant heating

mechanism is anticipated to apply more generally and be robust to
astrophysical uncertainties, making it a useful diagnostic tool. For
example, it has previously been suggested (Fialkov & Barkana 2014;
Fialkov et al. 2014b) that the high-𝑘 end of the power spectrum could
be used to probe the SED of early X-ray binaries.
Due to the uncertainties surrounding cosmic ray escape into the
IGM, we explored several plausible mechanisms. In models where
cosmic rays can escape from halos of any mass via diffusion or
outflow advection, we found cosmic ray heating of the IGM can be
more efficient than X-ray heating. However, similarly to Leite et al.
(2017), we found that the efficiency of cosmic rays as a heating source
is strongly dependent on the spectrum of the particles injected into
the IGM. A change in the source kinetic energy spectral exponent
from −2 to −1.7 decreases the IGM temperature from 284 to 19 K at
𝑧 = 8. This is because only the lower energy cosmic ray protons are
able to efficiently transfer their kinetic energy to the IGM as heat, as
was previously demonstrated in Sazonov & Sunyaev (2015).
For cosmic ray heating models similar to that of Sazonov & Sunyaev (2015), wherein cosmic rays can only escape from lower mass
Pop III star-forming halos, we found cosmic ray heating to be relatively inefficient. Due to Sazonov & Sunyaev (2015) not considering
the LW feedback in their model, we were only able to replicate the
significant increase in temperature they observed for unphysically
weak LW feedback or if we raised the threshold halo mass of cosmic
ray sources. Instead at theoretically motivated parameter values we
find the interplay between this mass threshold and the LW feedback,
which raises 𝑀mol,crit , leads to unexpectedly complex thermal histories. In such models, the IGM kinetic temperature was found to
have a local peak due to cosmic ray heating being cut off by the LW
feedback leading to a secondary episode of cosmic cooling before
Ly 𝛼 heating from Pop II stars becomes efficient and re-heats the
IGM. This unusual thermal evolution results in an inflexion point in
the heating arm of the global 21-cm signal. By fine-tuning the mass
threshold for cosmic ray escape, this inflexion point can be merged
with the minimum of the absorption trough resulting in a flattened
profile. Thus, we demonstrate that flat-based global 21-cm signals
(like the one detected by EDGES) can in principle be achieved in
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

22

T. Gessey-Jones et al.

models where one heating mechanism becomes inefficient at a similar time to the gas becoming fully coupled via the WF effect and
another heating mechanism turns on at a later time. We do not advocate for this model to be a self-consistent explanation of the EDGES
best-fit signal as it does not explain the depth or the steep sides of the
detected absorption trough (although a dual-heating scenario could
form a part of a more complex explanation which also invokes a radio
contribution to create the deep absorption).
There remains a major uncertainty in cosmic ray heating, namely
the strength of the IGM primordial magnetic field which scatters cosmic rays. This uncertainty leads to a large uncertainty in the cosmic
ray diffusivity within the IGM. Furthermore, in the case of primordial magnetic fields at the higher end of the experimentally allowed
range (> 0.01 nG comoving field strength), the transfer of energy
from cosmic rays to the IGM via Alfvén waves (Bera et al. 2023)
and synchrotron radio emission from cosmic ray electrons (Jana et al.
2019) are anticipated to become efficient. Since these effects are only
efficient for the largest experimentally allowed primordial magnetic
fields, we do not include them in our modelling. However, should the
primordial magnetic field take such a high value, these effects would
result in stronger heating of the IGM from cosmic rays, clustered
around star-forming halos, and enhanced radio background, the former acting to diminish the 21-cm signal and the latter enhancing it.
This sensitivity of the 21-cm signal, in particular the 21-cm power
spectrum, to cosmic ray heating of the IGM provides an indirect
probe of the primordial IGM magnetic field.
Overall we found that the distinct nature of cosmic ray heating
means it leaves characteristic signatures in 21-cm tomographic maps,
the high-𝑘 end of the power spectrum, and in some cases the 21-cm
global signal. These features are of sufficient magnitude to potentially be probed by the 21-cm signal measurements from current
and next-generation experiments. Thus, an understanding of cosmic
ray heating is necessary for the correct interpretation of the 21-cm
signal, and conversely, we may be able to constrain early universe
astrophysics that impacts cosmic rays (for example, the primordial
IGM magnetic field) through the 21-cm signal.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Donghui Huang for helpful conversations concerning the updating of the LW feedback prescription in our
simulation code, as well as to express our gratitude to John Cumner
and Boyuan Liu for their invaluable comments on earlier versions of
this paper. We would additionally like to thank the anonymous referee, for their careful reading of this work and insightful comments,
that have led to a much improved final manuscript.
TGJ would like to thank the Science and Technology Facilities
Council (UK) for their continued support through grant number
ST/V506606/1. AF is supported by a Royal Society University Research Fellowship #180523. EdLA acknowledges the support of the
Science and Technology Facilities Council (UK) through a Rutherford Fellowship. WJH thanks the Royal Society for their support
through a Royal Society University Research Fellowship. RB acknowledges the support of the Israel Science Foundation (grant No.
2359/20), the Ambrose Monell Foundation, the Institute for Advanced Study, the Vera Rubin Presidential Chair in Astronomy, and
the Packard Foundation.
For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) licence to any Author Accepted
Manuscript version arising from this submission.
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

DATA AVAILABILITY
The code to calculate the window functions used in this
study to model cosmic ray propagation is made available at
https://github.com/ThomasGesseyJones/CosmicRayHeatingFor21cm.
All other data used and generated in the writing of this article will
be shared on reasonable request to the corresponding author.

REFERENCES
Abdurashidova Z., et al., 2022, ApJ, 925, 221
Ackermann M., et al., 2013, Science, 339, 807
Alves Batista R., 2022, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2210.12855
Barkana R., 2016, Phys. Rep., 645, 1
Barkana R., 2018, Nature, 555, 71
Barkana R., Loeb A., 2004, ApJ, 609, 474
Barkana R., Loeb A., 2005, ApJ, 626, 1
Barkana R., Fialkov A., Liu H., Outmezguine N. J., 2023, Phys. Rev. D, 108,
063503
Bell A. R., 1978a, MNRAS, 182, 147
Bell A. R., 1978b, MNRAS, 182, 443
Bera A., Samui S., Datta K. K., 2023, MNRAS, 519, 4869
Berezinskii V. S., Bulanov S. V., Dogiel V. A., Ptuskin V. S., 1990, Astrophysics of cosmic rays. Elsevier Science & Technology
Bowman J. D., Rogers A. E. E., Monsalve R. A., Mozdzen T. J., Mahesh N.,
2018, Nature, 555, 67
Burns J. O., 2021, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London
Series A, 379, 20190564
Butler S. T., Buckingham M. J., 1962, Physical Review, 126, 1
Caprioli D., Spitkovsky A., 2014, ApJ, 783, 91
Caprioli D., Amato E., Blasi P., 2010, Astroparticle Physics, 33, 160
Chen K.-J., Heger A., Woosley S., Almgren A., Whalen D. J., 2014, ApJ,
792, 44
Chen K.-J., Heger A., Whalen D. J., Moriya T. J., Bromm V., Woosley S. E.,
2017, MNRAS, 467, 4731
Choudhury T. R., 2022, General Relativity and Gravitation, 54, 102
Cohen A., Fialkov A., Barkana R., 2016, MNRAS, 459, L90
Drury L. O., Markiewicz W. J., Voelk H. J., 1989, A&A, 225, 179
Ellingson S. W., Clarke T. E., Cohen A., Craig J., Kassim N. E., Pihlstrom
Y., Rickard L. J., Taylor G. B., 2009, IEEE Proceedings, 97, 1421
Ewall-Wice A., et al., 2016, MNRAS, 460, 4320
Ewall-Wice A., Chang T. C., Lazio J., Doré O., Seiffert M., Monsalve R. A.,
2018, ApJ, 868, 63
Feng C., Holder G., 2018, ApJ, 858, L17
Fialkov A., Barkana R., 2014, MNRAS, 445, 213
Fialkov A., Barkana R., 2019, MNRAS, 486, 1763
Fialkov A., Barkana R., Tseliakhovich D., Hirata C. M., 2012, MNRAS, 424,
1335
Fialkov A., Barkana R., Visbal E., Tseliakhovich D., Hirata C. M., 2013,
MNRAS, 432, 2909
Fialkov A., Barkana R., Pinhas A., Visbal E., 2014a, MNRAS, 437, L36
Fialkov A., Barkana R., Visbal E., 2014b, Nature, 506, 197
Fialkov A., Barkana R., Cohen A., 2018, Phys. Rev. Lett., 121, 011101
Field G. B., 1958, Proceedings of the IRE, 46, 240
Fragos T., et al., 2013, ApJ, 764, 41
Fraser S., et al., 2018, Physics Letters B, 785, 159
Furlanetto S. R., Oh S. P., 2005, MNRAS, 363, 1031
Furlanetto S. R., Zaldarriaga M., Hernquist L., 2004, ApJ, 613, 1
Furlanetto S. R., Oh S. P., Briggs F. H., 2006, Phys. Rep., 433, 181
Gessey-Jones T., et al., 2022, MNRAS, 516, 841
Ginzburg V. L., Ozernoi L. M., 1966, Soviet Ast., 9, 726
Gould R. J., 1972, Physica, 62, 555
Greif T. H., Johnson J. L., Bromm V., Klessen R. S., 2007, ApJ, 670, 1
Haiman Z., Abel T., Rees M. J., 2000, ApJ, 534, 11
Hegde S., Furlanetto S. R., 2023, MNRAS, 525, 428
Heger A., Woosley S. E., 2002, ApJ, 567, 532
Heger A., Woosley S. E., 2010, ApJ, 724, 341

Cosmic Ray Heating and the 21-cm Signal
Hibbard J. J., Mirocha J., Rapetti D., Bassett N., Burns J. O., Tauscher K.,
2022, ApJ, 929, 151
Hills R., Kulkarni G., Meerburg P. D., Puchwein E., 2018, Nature, 564, E32
Hummel J. A., Stacy A., Bromm V., 2016, MNRAS, 460, 2432
Ichiki K., Takahashi K., Ohno H., Hanayama H., Sugiyama N., 2006, Science,
311, 827
Jana R., Nath B. B., 2018, MNRAS, 479, 153
Jana R., Nath B. B., Biermann P. L., 2019, MNRAS, 483, 5329
Jasche J., Ciardi B., Enßlin T. A., 2007, MNRAS, 380, 417
Jones D., Palatnick S., Chen R., Beane A., Lidz A., 2021, ApJ, 913, 7
Kitayama T., Yoshida N., 2005, ApJ, 630, 675
Koopmans L., et al., 2015, in Advancing Astrophysics with the
Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14). p. 1 (arXiv:1505.07568),
doi:10.22323/1.215.0001
Kulkarni M., Visbal E., Bryan G. L., 2021, ApJ, 917, 40
Lacki B. C., 2015, MNRAS, 448, L20
Lagage P. O., Cesarsky C. J., 1983, A&A, 125, 249
Leite N., Evoli C., D’Angelo M., Ciardi B., Sigl G., Ferrara A., 2017, MNRAS,
469, 416
Lewis A., Bridle S., 2002, Phys. Rev. D, 66, 103511
Lewis A., Challinor A., 2011, CAMB: Code for Anisotropies in the
Microwave Background, Astrophysics Source Code Library, record
ascl:1102.026 (ascl:1102.026)
Lewis A., Challinor A., Lasenby A., 2000, ApJ, 538, 473
Liu H., Slatyer T. R., 2018, Phys. Rev. D, 98, 023501
Liu H., Outmezguine N. J., Redigolo D., Volansky T., 2019, Phys. Rev. D,
100, 123011
Longair M. S., 1994, High energy astrophysics. Vol.2: Stars, the galaxy and
the interstellar medium. Cambridge University Press
Ma X., Quataert E., Wetzel A., Hopkins P. F., Faucher-Giguère C.-A., Kereš
D., 2020, MNRAS, 498, 2001
Madau P., Meiksin A., Rees M. J., 1997, ApJ, 475, 429
Magg M., Hartwig T., Chen L.-H., Tarumi Y., 2022a, A-SLOTH: Semianalytical model to connect first stars and galaxies to observables, Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:2209.001 (ascl:2209.001)
Magg M., et al., 2022b, MNRAS, 514, 4433
Mebane R. H., Mirocha J., Furlanetto S. R., 2018, MNRAS, 479, 4544
Mebane R. H., Mirocha J., Furlanetto S. R., 2020, MNRAS, 493, 1217
Mertens F. G., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 493, 1662
Mertens F. G., Semelin B., Koopmans L. V. E., 2021, in Siebert A., et al., eds,
SF2A-2021: Proceedings of the Annual meeting of the French Society of
Astronomy and Astrophysics. pp 211–214 (arXiv:2109.10055)
Mesinger A., 2019, The Cosmic 21-cm Revolution; Charting the first billion
years of our universe. IOP Publishing, doi:10.1088/2514-3433/ab4a73
Mesinger A., Furlanetto S., Cen R., 2011, MNRAS, 411, 955
Mesinger A., Ferrara A., Spiegel D. S., 2013, MNRAS, 431, 621
Mirocha J., Furlanetto S. R., 2019, MNRAS, 483, 1980
Mirocha J., Mebane R. H., Furlanetto S. R., Singal K., Trinh D., 2018,
MNRAS, 478, 5591
Muñoz J. B., Dvorkin C., Loeb A., 2018, Phys. Rev. Lett., 121, 121301
Muñoz J. B., Dvorkin C., Cyr-Racine F.-Y., 2020, Phys. Rev. D, 101, 063526
Muñoz J. B., Qin Y., Mesinger A., Murray S. G., Greig B., Mason C., 2022,
MNRAS, 511, 3657
Nath B. B., Biermann P. L., 1993, MNRAS, 265, 241
Nebrin O., Giri S. K., Mellema G., 2023, MNRAS, 524, 2290
Ohira Y., 2022, ApJ, 929, 106
Ohira Y., Murase K., 2019, Phys. Rev. D, 100, 061301
Ohira Y., Murase K., Yamazaki R., 2010, A&A, 513, A17
Pacucci F., Mesinger A., Mineo S., Ferrara A., 2014, MNRAS, 443, 678
Parsons A. R., et al., 2014, ApJ, 788, 106
Philip L., et al., 2019, Journal of Astronomical Instrumentation, 8, 1950004
Planck Collaboration et al., 2016, A&A, 594, A19
Planck Collaboration et al., 2020, A&A, 641, A6
Price D. C., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 478, 4193
Pritchard J. R., Loeb A., 2012, Reports on Progress in Physics, 75, 086901
Ptuskin V., 2012, Astroparticle Physics, 39, 44
Reis I., Fialkov A., Barkana R., 2020, MNRAS, 499, 5993
Reis I., Fialkov A., Barkana R., 2021, MNRAS, 506, 5479

23

Reis I., Barkana R., Fialkov A., 2022, MNRAS, 511, 5265
Samui S., Subramanian K., Srianand R., 2018, MNRAS, 476, 1680
Sartorio N. S., et al., 2023, MNRAS, 521, 4039
Sazonov S., Sunyaev R., 2015, MNRAS, 454, 3464
Schauer A. T. P., Liu B., Bromm V., 2019, ApJ, 877, L5
Schauer A. T. P., Glover S. C. O., Klessen R. S., Clark P., 2021, MNRAS,
507, 1775
Schlickeiser R., 2002, Cosmic Ray Astrophysics. Springer Berlin
Schure K. M., Bell A. R., O’C Drury L., Bykov A. M., 2012, Space Sci. Rev.,
173, 491
Scott D., Rees M. J., 1990, MNRAS, 247, 510
Seager S., Sasselov D. D., Scott D., 2011, RECFAST: Calculate the Recombination History of the Universe, Astrophysics Source Code Library, record
ascl:1106.026 (ascl:1106.026)
Semelin B., et al., 2023, A&A, 672, A162
Sikder S., Barkana R., Fialkov A., Reis I., 2023, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2301.04585
Singh S., et al., 2022, Nature Astronomy, 6, 607
Sitwell M., Mesinger A., Ma Y.-Z., Sigurdson K., 2014, MNRAS, 438, 2664
Sivukhin D. V., 1965, Reviews of Plasma Physics, 1, 1
Sokolowski M., et al., 2015, Publ. Astron. Soc. Australia, 32, e004
Spitzer Lyman J., Scott E. H., 1969, ApJ, 158, 161
Stacy A., Bromm V., 2007, MNRAS, 382, 229
Strong A. W., Moskalenko I. V., 1998, ApJ, 509, 212
Sur S., Schleicher D. R. G., Banerjee R., Federrath C., Klessen R. S., 2010,
ApJ, 721, L134
Tanaka T., Hasegawa K., 2021, MNRAS, 502, 463
Tanaka T., Hasegawa K., Yajima H., Kobayashi M. I. N., Sugiyama N., 2018,
MNRAS, 480, 1925
Tavecchio F., Ghisellini G., Bonnoli G., Foschini L., 2011, MNRAS, 414,
3566
Tegmark M., Silk J., Rees M. J., Blanchard A., Abel T., Palla F., 1997, ApJ,
474, 1
Venumadhav T., Dai L., Kaurov A., Zaldarriaga M., 2018, Phys. Rev. D, 98,
103513
Visbal E., Barkana R., Fialkov A., Tseliakhovich D., Hirata C. M., 2012,
Nature, 487, 70
Voytek T. C., Natarajan A., Jáuregui García J. M., Peterson J. B., López-Cruz
O., 2014, ApJ, 782, L9
Whalen D., Van Veelen B., O’Shea B. W., Norman M. L., 2008, in Hunt
L. K., Madden S. C., Schneider R., eds, Proceedings of the International
Astronomical Union Vol. 255, Low-Metallicity Star Formation: From
the First Stars to Dwarf Galaxies. pp 116–120 (arXiv:0808.0524),
doi:10.1017/S1743921308024678
Whalen D. J., Joggerst C. C., Fryer C. L., Stiavelli M., Heger A., Holz D. E.,
2013a, ApJ, 768, 95
Whalen D. J., et al., 2013b, ApJ, 777, 110
Wise J. H., Demchenko V. G., Halicek M. T., Norman M. L., Turk M. J., Abel
T., Smith B. D., 2014, MNRAS, 442, 2560
Woosley S. E., 2010, ApJ, 719, L204
Woosley S. E., Heger A., 2007, Phys. Rep., 442, 269
Woosley S. E., Weaver T. A., 1986, ARA&A, 24, 205
Wouthuysen S. A., 1952, AJ, 57, 31
Wyithe J. S. B., Loeb A., 2004, Nature, 432, 194
Xia Z.-Q., Wang Y., Yuan Q., Fan Y.-Z., 2022, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2210.13052
Yajima H., Khochfar S., 2015, MNRAS, 448, 654
Yajima H., Choi J.-H., Nagamine K., 2011, MNRAS, 412, 411
Yajima H., Li Y., Zhu Q., Abel T., Gronwall C., Ciardullo R., 2014, MNRAS,
440, 776
Yokoyama S. L., Ohira Y., 2022, MNRAS, 515, 5467
Yokoyama S. L., Ohira Y., 2023, MNRAS, 523, 3671
Zahn O., Mesinger A., McQuinn M., Trac H., Cen R., Hernquist L. E., 2011,
MNRAS, 414, 727
de Lera Acedo E., et al., 2022, Nature Astronomy, 6, 984
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2023)

