Draft version February 26, 2018
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 5/2/11

CHEMICAL CONSTRAINTS ON THE CONTRIBUTION OF POPULATION III STARS TO COSMIC
REIONIZATION
Girish Kulkarni1 , Joseph F. Hennawi1 , Emmanuel Rollinde2 , Elisabeth Vangioni2

arXiv:1310.0684v1 [astro-ph.CO] 2 Oct 2013

Draft version February 26, 2018

ABSTRACT
Recent studies have highlighted that galaxies at z = 6–8 fall short of producing enough ionizing
photons to reionize the IGM, and suggest that Population III stars could resolve this tension, because
their harder spectra can produce ∼ 10× more ionizing photons than Population II. But this argument
depends critically on the duration of the Population III era, and because Population III stars form
from pristine gas, in turn depends on the rate of galactic enrichment. We use a semi-analytic model
of galaxy formation which tracks galactic chemical evolution, to gauge the impact of Population III
stars on reionization. Population III SNe produce distinct metal abundances, and we argue that the
duration of the Population III era can be constrained by precise relative abundance measurements in
high-z damped Lyα absorbers (DLAs), which provide a chemical record of past star-formation. We find
that a single generation of Population III stars can self-enrich galaxies above the critical metallicity
Zcrit = 10−4 Z⊙ for the Population III-to-II transition, on a very short timescale tself−enrich ∼ 106
yr, owing to the large metal yields and short lifetimes of Population III stars. This subsequently
terminates the Population III era, hence they contribute & 50% of the ionizing photons only for
z & 30, and at z = 10 contribute < 1%. The Population III contribution can be increased by delaying
metal mixing into the ISM. However comparing the resulting metal abundance pattern to existing
measurements in z . 6 DLAs, we show that the fractional contribution of high-mass Population III
stars to the ionization rate must be . 10% at z = 10. Future abundance measurements of z ∼ 7–8
QSOs and GRBs should probe the era when the chemcial vestiges of Population III star formation
become detectable.
Subject headings: Cosmology: dark ages, reionization, first stars — galaxies: evolution — galaxies:
ISM — stars: Population III
1. INTRODUCTION

Reionization of the intergalactic medium (IGM) is
a watershed event in the history of the universe, and
is tightly coupled to the problem of galaxy formation at high redshift. The primary evidence for hydrogen reionization comes from observation of GunnPeterson troughs (Gunn & Peterson 1965) in spectra of
high-redshift quasars (Fan et al. 2006b; Mortlock et al.
2011). Other pieces of evidence are in the angular
power spectrum of polarization anisotropy of the CMB
(Larson et al. 2011; Hinshaw et al. 2012), evolution of
the IGM temperature (Hui & Haiman 2003; Becker et al.
2011; Raskutti et al. 2012), and evolution of the luminosity function of Lyman-α emitters (Ouchi et al. 2010).
For a more complete discussion of observational constraints on reionization see, e.g., review by Fan et al.
(2006a). A general picture that emerges from these observations and a broad class of theoretical models is that
H i reionization was a gradual process that lasted for
hundreds of Myr from z ∼ 20 to z ∼ 6, and that starforming galaxies most likely provided the required ionizing photons (Choudhury & Ferrara 2006; Mitra et al.
2011; Kuhlen & Faucher-Giguère 2012; Robertson et al.
2013).
Given this evidence, several recent studies have used
averaged radiative transfer models to ask whether the
1 Max Planck Institute for Astronomy, Königstuhl 17, 69117
Heidelberg, Germany; girish@mpia-hd.mpg.de
2 Institut d’Astrophysique de Paris, UMR 7095, UPMC, Paris
VI, 98 bis boulevard Arago, 75014 Paris, France

observed populations of galaxies at high redshift produce enough ionizing photons to reionize the IGM
(Robertson et al. 2010).
Kuhlen & Faucher-Giguère
(2012) studied constraints from measurements of the
hydrogen photionization rate, ΓHI , from the (postreionization) Lyman-α forest (Faucher-Giguère et al.
2008; Becker & Bolton 2013) and the requirement that
ΓHI should evolve in a continuous manner through the
epoch of reionization. They concluded these two conditions require either a rapid evolution in the ionizing photon escape fraction, fesc , or an extrapolation of
the galaxy luminosity function to extremely faint luminosities (MUV ∼ −10 or L ∼ 0.002L∗). Several
independent studies have come to similar conclusions
(Fontanot et al. 2012; Mitra et al. 2012; Finlator et al.
2012; Raskutti et al. 2012; Haardt & Madau 2012;
Alvarez et al. 2012; Robertson et al. 2013). This work
suggests that (1) fesc is at least ten times higher at z = 10
than at z = 4, and/or (2) there is a large population of
undetected faint galaxies that produces the lion’s share
of the total ionizing flux, and/or (3) new galactic sources,
such as mini-quasars or Population III stars, are active
at high redshift and assist star-forming galaxies in reionizing the IGM.
Owing to their primordial composition, Population III
stars have harder spectra and thus emit more hydrogenionizing photons. A cluster of Population III stars (with
100–260 M⊙ Salpeter IMF) produces an order of magnitude more hydrogen-ionizing photons than a cluster
of Population II stars (with 0.1–100 M⊙ Salpeter IMF)
with the same total mass (Schaerer 2002). Thus, if the

2
Population III star formation rate is high enough, their
contribution to the total ionizing photon budget could be
significant. In this paper, we study the impact of Population III stars on reionization using a semi-analytic model
of galaxy formation that tracks galactic chemical evolution and is fully coupled to the evolution of the thermal
and ionization state of the IGM. Tracking the chemical
evolution is crucial for understanding the contribution
of Population III stars, which in our model form when
the gas-phase metallicity of interstellar media (ISM) of
galaxies is below a critical metallicy Zcrit . It is these
stars in the very first galaxies that presumably initiated
the process of reionization as they were likely the first
sources of hydrogen-ionizing photons. As the formation
of these stars depends on the metallicity of the gas out of
which they form, the total constribution of these stars to
the cosmic star formation rate (SFR) density, and hence
the ionizing photon budget, depends on the chemical evolution of their environment, which is precisely what our
model aims to calculate.
The role of Population III stars in cosmic chemical
and ionization evolution has been studied previously.
Faced with a high value of the Thomson scattering optical depth to the last scattering surface, τe , reported
by the first-year WMAP results τe = 0.17 (Spergel et al.
2003), which suggested that reionization occured very
early, several studies considered the ionizing emissivity of Population III stars (Venkatesan et al. 2003;
Wyithe & Loeb 2003; Cen 2003; Sokasian et al. 2004;
Yoshida et al. 2004), and others considered reionization
scenarios driven by Population III stars (Daigne et al.
2004; Choudhury & Ferrara 2005; Daigne et al. 2006;
Rollinde et al. 2009; Mitra et al. 2011). Due to the
widely different methods and assumptions of these works,
it is is not straigthforward to compare their results.
Nonetheless, there are some common features in their results. In all of these models, reionization is initiated by
Population III stars, which dominate the cosmic stellar
content for some time. Eventually, however, the Population III SFR is reduced due to chemical enrichment of the
star-forming gas, and the process of reionization is completed by Population II stars. A general conclusion of
these studies was that, under conservative assumptions
regarding various feedback processes (chemical, star formation, photoionization), Population III stars could contribute significantly to hydrogen reionization at z & 10.
However, none of these models track the chemical evolution of the galaxies that host Population III stars at
high redshift.3 This is a significant drawback, because
the time-scale over which the ISM of these galaxies is enriched by the first generation of Population III stars directly regulates the cosmic Population III star formation
rate and hence the contribution of Population III stars to
reionization. Indeed, Wise et al. (2012) recently used radiation hydrodynamics simulations to argue for just this
kind of feedback. These authors found that for high-mass
Population III stars (Chabrier IMF with Mchar = 100
M⊙ ), which produce pair-instability supernovae, just one
supernova is enough to enrich the parent halo to a metal3 Models of Population III star formation that implement chemical evolution exist in the literature (e.g., Salvadori et al. 2007).
These have proven to be very useful in studying, e.g., the extremely
metal-poor stars in the Galactic halo. But these models do not calculate IGM reionization history.

licity of 10−3 Z⊙ and prevent further Population III star
formation. However, these authors did not study the implications of this chemical feedback on the contribution
of Population III star-forming haloes to ionizing photon
budget and reionization. This would require simulating
star formation and chemical feedback for a cosmic ensemble of haloes with a wide range of masses, and coupling
these to the IGM via radiative transfer while considering
various observational constraints on reionization.
To summarize, previous work aiming to understand the contribution of high-redshift faint galaxies
or Population III star-forming galaxies to reionization
(e.g. Venkatesan et al. 2003; Choudhury & Ferrara 2005;
Robertson et al. 2013) did not consider the detailed
physics of galaxy formation, with chemical evolution and
Population III star formation, while models that included
these effects (Salvadori et al. 2007; Wise et al. 2012) did
not couple galaxy formation with IGM reionization. In
Kulkarni et al. (2013) we presented a a semi-analytic
model of galaxy formation that tracks the chemical evolution of galaxies as well as the thermal and ioinization evolution of the IGM, and used this model to argue that measurements of relative abundances in highredshift Damped Lyα systems can place interesting constraints on the Population III IMF. In this paper, we use
this model to study the impact of Population III starformation on reionization. Our model improves upon
previous work on this subject in three important ways.
First, it accounts for chemical evolution within a halo in
detail, as part of a semi-analytical model of galaxy formation, taking into account stellar lifetimes, and inflows
and outflows. This lets us study the Population III-to-II
transition in haloes of various masses. Second, it uses
halo mass assembly histories from cosmological simulations and fully couples galaxy formation to the thermal and ionization evolution of the IGM. This also lets
us consider halo-mass-dependent effects like photoionization feedback. Third, we consider a range of Population III IMFs that presumably bracket the true IMF. A
chemical evolution model with these three features, coupled self-consistently with thermal and ionization evolution of the IGM, provides a useful framework to study
the contribution of Population III stars to reionization.
2. MODELING THE COUPLED EVOLUTION OF GALAXIES
AND THE IGM

We use a model of galaxy formation and IGM evolution
described in Kulkarni et al. (2013). Here we highlight the
the main features of the model, and refer the reader to
that paper for additional details.
1. Average mass assembly histories of dark matter
haloes are obtained from fitting functions calibrated to cosmological simulations (Fakhouri et al.
2010) for a number of logarithmically spaced halo
masses. These assembly histories are a function of
halo mass at z = 0.
2. Baryonic evolution is implemented for each halo
mass value. In simplest terms, this assumes that
a halo (1) accretes baryons through cosmological accretion, (2) forms stars from any gas contained in the halo for sufficiently long duration, and
(3) ejects baryons via supernova powered outflows.

3
This lets us calculate various properties—such as
metallicity and star formation rate—as functions
of halo mass. Global averages, such as the cosmic
SFR density, are calculated by integrating over all
halo masses.
3. Gas content of a halo is influenced by gas inflow due
to cosmic accretion, star formation, stellar mass
loss, and gas outflow due to supernova feedback.
Gas inflow is calculated as being proportional to
the dark matter acretion rate as given by the mass
assembly history. Outflow rates are calculated according to the stellar IMF employed, by comparing the kinetic energy released by supernovae with
the depth of the halo potential well. We also account for stellar lifetimes and mass loss from existing stars.
4. We assume that star formation rate, ψ, in a
halo tracks the total amount of cold gas, Mcool ,
which is determined by defining a metalicity dependent cooling radius (Kauffmann et al. 1999;
Springel & Hernquist 2003).
5. Metal content of a halo is calculated by accounting for nucleosynthetic yields by integrating over
the Population II and Population III stellar IMFs.
Halo metallicity is diluted by inflows from the
metal-poor IGM and is enhanced by stellar nucleosynthesis. We do not assume instantaneous recycling in this calculation, i.e., we fully account for
the delay in the production of metals due to finite
stellar lifetimes. In this work, our fiducial model
assumes instantaneous and homogeneous mixing of
metals in the ISM. But we also consider variations
of the model which relax this assumption.
6. We implement Population III stars using a critical
metallicity argument Zcrit , with our fiducial value
as Zcrit = 10−4 Z⊙ . When the ISM metallicity in a
halo becomes larger than Zcrit , Population III star
formation stops, and new stars form according to
a Population II IMF.
7. We consider two different Population III IMFs
(Turk et al. 2009; Dopcke et al. 2011): 1–100 M⊙
Salpeter and 100–260 M⊙ Salpeter. These are selected to represent two extreme possibilities. (We
discuss this choice below.) The Population II IMF
is kept constant at 0.1–100 M⊙ Salpeter.
8. Stellar lifetimes are taken from Maeder & Meynet
(1989) and Schaerer (2002).
Metal yields
are taken from Heger & Woosley (2002) and
Woosley & Weaver (1995). Population II SEDs are
synthesised using starburst99 (Leitherer et al.
1999; Vázquez & Leitherer 2005) with respective
metallicities. Synthetic spectra of Population III
stars are taken from Schaerer (2002).
9. We model the thermal, ionization, and chemical
evolution of the IGM by implementing an inhomogeneous IGM with a lognormal density distribution. We calculate the evolution of volume
filling factor of H ii regions, QHII (z), according
to the method outlined by Miralda-Escudé et al.

(2000). Reionization is said to be complete when
all low-density regions are ionized (we denote the
corresponding redshift of reionization by zreion.).
The corresponding IGM thermal evolution is determing by solving the thermal evolution equation
(Chiu & Ostriker 2000; Hui & Haiman 2003), accounting for photoheating and Compton and recombination cooling. The minimum mass of starforming regions is calculated from the IGM temperature using the Jeans criterion (Barkana & Loeb
2001). Chemical evolution of the IGM is calculated by accounting for outflows from haloes of all
masses.
Before discussing our results, we briefly comment on
the Population III IMFs considered in this work. The
IMF of Population III stars is poorly understood. Several
early studies predicted that Population III stars have a
characteristic mass of a few hundred M⊙ (e.g., Abel et al.
2002). In recent years, this prediction has come down in
the range of 20–100 M⊙ (e.g., Turk et al. 2009). Recently, Dopcke et al. (2011) argued that in the absence
of metal-line cooling, dynamical effects can still lead to
fragmentation in proto-stellar gas clouds. In their simulations, this resulted in Population III stars with masses
as low as 0.1 M⊙ (this picture predicts the existence of
many Population III stars surviving in the Galaxy till
the present day.). Given our current poor understanding of the Population III IMF, in this work we choose
to work with two different IMFs: 1–100 M⊙ Salpeter
(“low-mass IMF”) and 100–260 M⊙ Salpeter (“high-mass
IMF”). The former has metal yields from AGB stars and
core-collapse supernovae, while the latter has yields from
pair-instability supernovae.
3. RESULTS

We now present the results of our model. In Section
3.1, we describe the results of our fiducial model which assumes instantaneous and homogeneous mixing of metals
in the ISM, and show that it predicts a very small Population III contribution to reionization. The main reason for
this is chemical feedback, which we study in Section 3.2.
We then study the conditions under which Population III
stars could contribute significantly to reionization, by
modelling delayed mixing of metals in the ISM, thereby
reducing chemical feedback. In Section 3.3 we look at
the constraints from chemical enrichment measurements
of high redshift DLAs and argue that these rule out significantly delayed mixing, and hence any significant contribution from high-mass Population III stars.
3.1. Population III Contribution to Reionization
Our model calibration procedure is described in detail in Kulkarni et al. (2013). The model is calibrated
by matching (1) the observed cosmic SFR density evolution (Hopkins & Beacom 2006), (2) the fraction of
total baryon density in collapsed haloes at z = 0
(Fukugita & Peebles 2004), and the reionization history of the IGM as measured by (3) the electron
Thomson scattering optical depth to the last scattering surface (Hinshaw et al. 2012) and (4) the hydrogen
photoionization rate evolution (Meiksin & White 2004;
Bolton & Haehnelt 2007; Faucher-Giguère et al. 2008;
Becker & Bolton 2013).

4
We assume a constant star-formation efficiency parameter f∗ , defined by


Mcool
ψ = f∗
,
(1)
tdyn
where ψ is the halo star formation rate, Mcool is the
cold gas mass in the halo, and tdyn is the halo dynamical
time. The star-formation efficiency is then tuned to reproduce the cosmic SFR density. For our fiducial model
(described below), we have f∗ (Pop. II) = 0.002 and f∗
(Pop. III) = 0.004. Star formation in haloes is accompanied by supernova-induced outflows, the strength of
which is fixed by matching the fraction of total baryon
density in collapsed haloes at z = 0.
Once the star formation efficiency is fixed, reionization depends mainly on the escape fraction of ionizing
photons, fesc , defined as the fraction of ionizing photons
that escape the parent galaxy. We assume fesc to be independent of redshift and halo mass, and calibrate it to
reproduce the observed values of the electron Thomson
scattering optical depth, τe and the hydrogen photoionization rate, ΓHI . It is crucial to include both these constraints as the observed hydrogen photoionization rate
evolution imposes continuity on the epoch of reionization. Our fiducial model has fesc = 0.2. Although, in
our calibrated model, the IGM electron Thomson scattering optical depth τe is always obtained in the 1σ range
of its best-fit value (0.089 ± 0.014 as given by WMAP9;
Hinshaw et al. 2012), our value of τ is always closer to the
upper-limit of this range. This suggests that an evolving
escape fraction is necessary for fitting both τe and ΓHI
simultaneously (Mitra et al. 2012; Finlator et al. 2012).
We calibrate the model independently for each of the
two Population III stellar IMFs considered in this paper.
Our fiducial model assumes instantaneous mixing of metals in the ISM. We describe the results of this model in
this section. We discuss the effect of relaxing the instantaneous mixing assumption in subsequent sections.
3.1.1. Population III SFR

Fig. 1 shows the results of our fiducial model. Panel
(c2) shows the predicted total (Population II + Population III) cosmic SFR density evolution for the two
different Population III IMFs (low-mass IMF in black
and high-mass IMF in red). The red data points
are observational measurements from a compilation by
Hopkins & Beacom (2006), in which consistent dust obscuration corrections, SFR calibrations, and IMF assumptions are applied to ultraviolet and far-infrared
data. Our model predictions are in good agreement with
the data regardless of what Population III IMF is assumed. Indeed, the total SFR density in the two cases is
nearly identical (the red and black solid curves overlap),
because the contribution of Population III star formation to the total SFR is very low over most of the cosmic history. The Population III SFR density evolution
is shown separately by the dashed curves. The corresponding panel (c1) shows the fraction of the total SFR
produced by Population III star formation. We find that
the contribution of Population III stars to the total SFR
density is low (less than 10%) throughout most of the age
of the Universe. It is greater than 10% for less than 100
Myr (z > 40). Population III stars dominate the cosmic

SFR density for an even smaller time period at z ∼ 50
(cf. Naoz et al. 2006). By the time that galaxies are observable at z < 8, all haloes capable of forming stars
(i.e., above the minimum mass for star-formation) have
already enriched themselves above the critical metallicity, and hence the Population III SFR is zero at these late
times. Thus, although Population III stars initiate the
epoch of reionization, they quickly relinquish their dominant role by enriching their environment. We discuss the
reason behind this below.
We note that the star formation history shown in
Fig. 1, together with our chemical evolution model, is
also consistent with the observed mass-metallicity relations (Erb et al. 2006; Maiolino et al. 2008) at redshifts
2.3 and 3.7 (see Kulkarni et al. 2013 for details). The
corresponding IGM metallicity is also consistent with observational estimates (Schaye et al. 2003; Simcoe et al.
2004). We also note here that the difference between the
two Population III SFR density curves (dashed curves)
in panel (c2) of Fig. 1 can be understood from the different metal yields for the two Population III IMFs (recall
that the Population II IMF is the same in both cases).
The high-mass IMF has a larger metal yield. As a result, in this case haloes are enriched beyond Zcrit earlier
as compared to the low-mass IMF, and Population III
star formation is terminated earlier. This is reflected in
the reduced level of Population III SFR density for the
high-mass IMF.
3.1.2. Photoionization rate

The small contribution of Population III stars to the
total cosmic SFR density suggests that their contribution to reionization will also be small. This is seen in
panel (b2) of Fig. 1, which shows the evolution of the
hydrogen photoionization rate in our model. Making the
so-called local source approximation, which is valid for
spectral indices typical to star-forming galaxies, the hydrogen photoionization rate is given by
Z ∞
ΓHI (z) = (1 + z)3
dνλ(z, ν)ṅν (z)σ(ν),
(2)
ν912

where σ(ν) is the photoionization cross-section of hydrogen, λ(z, ν) is the redshift-dependent mean free path
of ionizing photons. We calculate the mean free path
of ionizing photons as in Paper 1 by integrating over
the lognormal density PDF of the IGM and estimating the average distance between high-density, neutral
regions. This method is calibrated to reproduce the
incidence rate of Lyman-limit systems at low redshifts
(Miralda-Escudé et al. 2000; Choudhury & Ferrara 2005;
Prochaska et al. 2009). Our model agrees with the measurement of Prochaska et al. (2009). The quantity ṅν (z)
is the number density of ionizing photons in the IGM per
unit time, and is given by
Z
ṅν (z) = fesc ρ̇∗ (z) dm φ(m)tage (m)QH (m). (3)
The integral in this equation is over stellar masses and
takes the IMF-dependence of the ionizing photon flux
into account: φ(m) is the normalised stellar IMF, tage (m)
is the age of a star with mass m and QH (m) the stellar
hydrogen-ionizing photon flux (in photons s−1 ) provided

5

Figure 1. Results for our fiducial model. Panels (a1) and (a2) show the metallicity evolution for three particular halo masses for
illustration. The long-dashed curve in panel (a1) shows the evolution of Mmin in cosmological H ii regions. Panel (b1) and (b2) show the
evolution of the hydrogen photoionization rate and the contribution to it from Population III stars for the two models considered. The
corresponding panel (b1) plots the ratio of the two quantities. In this panel, the black curve corresponds to the low-mass IMF model and
the red curve to the high-mass IMF model. Panels (c1) and (c2) show the evolution of the cosmic SFR density in the model and the
contribution from Population III stars. Vertical dashed lines in all panels show the redshift of reionization.

by stellar evolution models (Schaerer 2002). The quantity fesc is the escape fraction of ionizing photons that
accounts for the fraction of the ionizing photons that
escape into the IGM. The escape fraction is a free parameter of our model. In this paper, we assume that fesc
is constant at all redshifts. We comment on the effect of
this assumption below. Our fiducial model has fesc = 0.2
In panel (b2) of Fig. 1, the data points are measurements of the hydrogen photoionization rate as deduced from the mean opacity of the hydrogen Lyα
forest (Meiksin & White 2004; Bolton & Haehnelt 2007;
Faucher-Giguère et al. 2008), where we note that there
is disagreement between the measurements at the factorof-two level, which likely results from different assumptions about the density distribution and thermal state
of the IGM. Here were choose to fit the data by
Faucher-Giguère et al. (2008) but this choice is not critically important for our main result. The solid curves in
panel (b2) of Fig. 1 show the model predictions corresponding to two different Population III IMFs (low-mass
IMF in black and high-mass IMF in red). The model predictions agree very well with the observational measurements.4 As seen by the evolution of the hydrogen photoionization rate, reionization in our model is gradual. It
begins at z & 30 and is 90% complete by z ∼ 7. This
gradual change in the ionization state of the IGM helps
us simultaneously reproduce the observed electron scattering optical depth τe = 0.089 ± 0.014 (Hinshaw et al.
4 Note that we have ignored the ionizing photon contribution
from quasars in our model, which are expected to only contribute
significantly for z < 3 (Fontanot et al. 2012) and we do not expect
any Population III contribution at these late times.

2012) and the photoionization rate data. Before reionization at zreion = 7.5, the photoionization rate increases
rapidly as UV photon sources build up. There is a sudden
jump at z = zreion when different H ii regions overlap.
(This redshift is marked by the vertical dashed line in
Fig. 1). This is because at this redshift, a given point in
the IGM starts “seeing” multiple sources, which rapidly
enhances the UV photon mean free path, thereby affecting the photoionization rate. Secondly, Fig. 1 also shows
that the contribution of Population III stars to reionization is small. This is clear from the overlap between the
red and black solid curves in panel (b2), and is evident
in the dashed curves, which show the contribution to ΓHI
by Population III stars. We see that the Population III
contribution to photoionization rate is subdominant over
most of the reionization history. Panel (b1) of Fig. 1 further highlights this by showing the fraction of the H i
photoionization rate contributed by Population III starformation, relative to the total rate. Except at the earliest stages of galaxy formation (z ∼ 50), the ratio is much
less than unity. For the low-mass IMF, the ratio is less
than 10% for z . 20, and for the high-mass IMF, it is
less than 10% for z . 30.
3.1.3. Understanding the Low Population III Contribution

We now discuss the reason behind the small contribution of Population III stars to reionization in our model.
This contribution depends on three parameters of the
model: (1) the efficiency with which cold gas is converted into stars, (2) the escape fraction of ionizing radiation, and (3) chemical feedback, quantified by the time
scale over which a halo enriches itself beyond the critical metallicity Zcrit and stops the formation of Popula-

6
tion III stars. These three factors are not independent of
each other: a higher efficiency of star formation reduces
the self-enrichment time scale of a halo, and a higher
fesc requires us to reduce the star formation efficiency if
we are to satisfy the observational constraints on reionization. In our model, the constraints from ΓHI , τe and
the cosmic SFR density completely fix the star formation
efficiency and the escape fraction. Therefore, as we assume instantaneous metal mixing in our fiducial model,
the self-enrichment time scale is also fixed.
Panel (a2) of Fig. 1 shows the metallicity evolution of
three different haloes in our model, which helps one understand the small contribution of Population III stars
to reionization in our model (for simplicity, we show results only for the high-mass IMF in this panel, but the
low-mass IMF gives similar trajectories). The horizontal
dashed line in this panel shows the critical metallicity
Zcrit , which we always take to be 10−4 Z⊙ . The mass assembly history of these haloes is shown in the corresponding panel (a1); their masses at z = 0 are about 1010 M⊙ ,
1011 M⊙ , and 1012 M⊙ respectively. The dashed curve in
the panel (a1) shows the evolution of the minimum mass
of star-forming haloes, Mmin , which is set according to
the Jeans criterion, which in turn depends on the thermal evolution of the IGM (see, e.g., Rorai et al. 2013,
for a recent discussion). To be specific, here we consider
haloes that collapse in cosmological H ii regions, and the
Mmin evolution shown corresponds only to these regions
(but the discussion could be easily generalized to H i
regions). In these regions, Mmin is roughly constant at
∼ 108 M⊙ as this evolution is only determined by the
Jeans scale corresponding to the characteristic temperature of the IGM at T ∼ 104 K. In each halo’s assembly
history, star formation begins when its mass crosses the
threshold set by Mmin. This is manifest in the metallicity
evolution history of each halo as shown in panel (a2). It
is seen that the halo metallicities increase mostly monotonically.5 Additionally, in each case, the initial burst
of Population III stars is sufficient to rapidly enhance
the ISM metallicity beyond Zcrit . This metallicity evolution is in good agreement with the hydrodynamic simulations of Wise et al. (2012). It is exactly this prompt
enrichment of the ISM of high-redshift galaxies which
causes an early cut-off in the Population III SFR. The
range of redshifts in panel (c2) that show sub-dominant
Population III SFR, arises from only the lowest mass
star-forming halos, which only recently crossed the minimum mass threshold. However, the vast majority of
star-forming halos at higher masses have already been
chemically self-enriched by this time, and have stopped
forming Population III stars, which in turn reduces the
overall contribution of Population III stars to the photoionization rate. As previously mentioned above, apart
from the star formation efficiency assumed in the model,
the rapid enrichment of galaxies is a result of the assumption that metals are instantaneously mixed in the
ISM gas. We discuss the assumption in detail in the next
section.
Finally, we briefly note that haloes down to a mass
limit of Mmin ∼ 108 M⊙ contribute to the ionization
5 Some non-monotonicity seen in panel (a2) of Fig. 1 is due to
the behaviour of Mmin at the highest redshift, which can restrict
gas inflow into haloes at certain times, affecting the metallicity.

Figure 2. Halo self-enrichment time scale in our model, defined
as the time between the first star-formation episode of the halo
and the time at which its gas-phase metallicity crosses Zcrit . It
quantifies the time scale of Population III star formation in a given
halo. Halo mass at z = 0 serves as a label for different haloes. The
solid curves show the time scale for the fiducial models. Other
curves show the time scale for models with delayed enrichment.

flux in Eqn. (3). At z ∼ 7 this corresponds to a
UV magnitude to M1500 = −10 in our model, which
agrees well with the very faint minimum galaxy magnitude, to which the UV luminosity function of Lyman
break galaxies (LBGs) must be extrapolated to in order to reionize the universe (Kuhlen & Faucher-Giguère
2012; Fontanot et al. 2012; Robertson et al. 2013). Furthermore, the halo masses which we deduce for these
faint galaxies Mmin ∼ 108 M⊙ agree well with masses
deduced using abundance matching (Trenti et al. 2010;
Kuhlen & Faucher-Giguère 2012). This indicates that in
our fiducial model, it is the faint galaxies that produce
the bulk of the ionizing photons that reionized the IGM,
and not Population III stars.
3.2. The Halo Self-Enrichment Timescale
In the results presented above, metals injected into the
ISM by supernova explosions are assumed to be instantaneously mixed into the halo ISM. Instantaneous and homogeneous mixing of metals is a standard assumption in
galactic chemical evolution studies (Tinsley 1980; Pagel
2009; Matteucci 2012) and is responsible for the early
termination of Population III star formation in our fiducial model. Note that we are not assuming instantaneous
recycling, since we directly model the delay in the synthesis of new metals due to finite stellar lifetimes. However,
we have assumed instantaneous mixing, which is to say
that after a supernova event, newly liberated metals are
instantneously available in the ISM to influence the next
generation of star-formation. We have seen in our fiducial model, that the initial burst of Population III stars is
sufficient to enhance the ISM metallicity beyond Zcrit in
any halo mass bin over a very short time scale. When this

7

Figure 3. Same as Fig. 1 but for a model in which metal enrichment in ISM is gradual with a delay time of tdelay = 1011 yr. This
increases the self-enrichment time scale of haloes to about 108 yr. Consequently, the contribution of Population III stars to the cosmic star
formation rate and to the hydrogen photoionization rate is enhanced relatived to the fiducial model. See text for details.

Figure 4. Same as Figs. 1 and 3 and but for a model in which metal enrichment in ISM is gradual with a delay time of tdelay = 1012 yr,
i.e., an order-of-magnitude slower that in Fig. 3. This further increases the self-enrichment time scale of haloes to about 4 × 108 yr. As a
result, the contribution of Population III stars to the cosmic star formation rate and to the hydrogen photoionization rate is high enough to
complete hydrogen reionization. Note that in this model, the redshift of reionization is slightly different for the two Population III IMFs;
we only show the low-mass IMF case for simplicity.

8
happens, the corresponding galaxy stops forming Population III stars. Since most of the mass in the universe is
contained in M∗ haloes, the Population III cosmic SFR
density begins to decline as soon as these haloes cross the
Zcrit threshold. This is the crucial effect that reduces the
contribution of Population III stars, and that was not
captured in previous models because they did not track
chemical enrichment for a large population of haloes in a
cosmological volume. We now discuss the dependence of
this result on our assumption of instantaneous mixing.
The solid lines in Fig. 2 show the self-enrichment time
scale as a function of halo mass for the two Population III
IMFs in our fiducial model, where the low-mass IMF
is shown in black and high-mass IMF in red. We define the self-enrichment time scale as the time between
the first star-formation episode of the halo and the time
at which its gas-phase metallicity crosses Zcrit . In this
plot, haloes are labelled by their mass at z = 0; their
actual mass value at the time of crossing Mmin is not
shown. In the low-mass IMF case (solid black), the time
scale is a few times 106 yr. Pair-instability SNe have
higher metal output, which results in a shorter enrichment time scale by a factor of 3 in the high-mass IMF
case (solid gray). As discussed in section 3.1, it is this
short self-enrichment time scale that restricts the contribution of Population III stars to reionization. Note that
these curves have a very flat dependence on halo mass
because the self-enrichment time scale depends primarily
on stellar lifetimes.
In the ISM of a galaxy, mixing of metals ejected by supernovae is carried out by different mechanisms on different length scales: diffusive dispersion due to large-scale
motion on kpc scales, turbulent diffusion on pc scales,
and molecular diffusion on smaller scales. As a result,
the self-enrichment time scale is decided by (1) the respective time scales of these mixing processes, (2) the
rate of metal production by supernovae, and (3) rate of
interaction with the environment, via inflows and outflows of gas. In our fiducial model, the time scale of the
mixing processes is assumed to be zero and therefore the
self-enrichment time scale depends only on the stellar
lifetimes via the supernova rate. This is the reason behind the short self-enrichment time scale shown in Fig. 2.
We now relax this instantaneous mixing assumption.
Supernova-driven metal-mixing in the interstellar
medium has been studied using hydrodynamical simulations by de Avillez & Mac Low (2002), who used tracer
particles in a simulation of a 1 × 1 × 20 kpc3 region of the
Galactic disk and found mixing time scales between 106
and 108 yr (see their Fig. 8) for supernova rates of ∼ 1 to
∼ 100 times the Galactic supernova rate. The lower end
of this range is of the same order of magnitude as the
self-enrichment time scale in our fiducial model. But the
results of these simulations suggest that the mixing time
scale could very well be two or three orders of magnitude
larger.
We consider the effect of longer self-enrichment time
scales on our result by implementing a “mixing function”,
f (t), which governs the rate at which metals are mixed
in the ISM. The source term due to star formation in the
metallicity evolution equation is of the form (Eqn. 19 in

Kulkarni et al. 2013)
Z mu
dm φ(m) · ψ[t(z) − τ (m)]
ṀZ (z) =
ml

× mpZ (m),

(4)

where m is the stellar mass, ψ(t) is the star formation
rate at time t, φ(m) is the stellar IMF, τ (m) is the stellar
age, and pZ (m) is the mass fraction of a star of initial
mass m that is converted to metals and ejected. The
limits ml and mu define the range of stellar masses considered in the IMF. To relax the instantaneous mixing
assumption, we modify Eqn. (4) to
Z mu
dm φ(m)mpZ (m)
ṀZ (z) =
ml

×

Z t(z)

dt̃ ψ[t̃(z) − τ (m)]f (t̃),

(5)

t(z)−tdelay

where f (t̃) is a mixing function that serves to delay the
mixing of metals in the ISM after a supernova event.
The mixing function is defined over a time duration of
tdelay . In this picture, after a supernova has exploded,
the resulting metal mass is added to the ISM gradually
over a time tdelay . Until this time, we imagine the metals to be locked up into un-mixed pockets of the ISM,
and so they are not available for future star-formation.
Thus, our fiducial model corresponds to the case where
the mixing function is a delta function with tdelay = 0 yr.
For non-zero values of tdelay , the ISM metallicity can remain below the critical metallicity Zcrit for a longer time
compared to our fiducial model. Therefore, we would
expect that in this case, Population III star formation
will continue for a longer period, and possibly impact
reionization. The mixing function is determined by the
complex interplay of various mixing processes in the ISM.
The most conservative form of the mixing function is a
constant of the form
 −1
tdelay if t < tdelay
f (t) =
(6)
0
otherwise,
where t is the time since a supernova explosion.6 Note
that f (t) is normalised such that all of the supernova
ejecta is mixed in the ISM over the period tdelay . We
adopt this simple form for the mixing function in this paper. Figs. 3 and 4 show the results of our model with this
mixing function and tdelay = 1011 yr and tdelay = 1012
yr respectively. The self-enrichment time scales in these
models is compared to that in our fiducial model in Fig. 2
(only the high-mass Population III IMF case is shown
for simplicity). Given that we have adopted a mixing
timescale which is much longer than the age of the Universe, i.e., tdelay = 1010 or 1011 yr, the effective result
is that at z ∼ 10, where tz=10 ∼ 109 yr, these mixing models imply that only 1% and 0.1% of the metals
produced by Population III SNe are mixed into the ISM,
respectively. As we will see below even this small amount
6 This form of the mixing function is the most conservative in the
sense that all time instances from 0 to tdelay are treated equally. As
a result, metals are mixed into the ISM at a constant rate and, in
the limit of an exactly closed system, the metallicity would increase
linearly.

9
of metals is still enough to produce significant chemical
feedback that influences Population III star formation.
This results because as shown in panel (a2) of Fig. 1, a
single generation of Population III SNe inejcts enough
metals to raise the the ISM metallicity of M∗ halos to
a Z ∼ 10−1 Z⊙ by z ∼ 10, if these metals are instantateously mixed. Thus reducing this yield by a factor of
∼ tz=10 /tdelay ∼ 100, as in the case when tdelay = 1011 ,
is still sufficient to be in excess of the critical metallicity.
For this reason, and as is also clear from the mathematical form of Eqn. 5, we generally expect a non-linear dependence of the self-enrichment timescale on tdelay , and
similarly the dependence of Population III star-formation
on tdelay will also be nonlinear. For instance, between
Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, changing tdelay by a factor of 10 results
in small changes of factor of 3 in the self-enrichment time
scale.
In Fig. 3 the same curves illustrating the starformation, reionization, and enrichment history as in
Fig. 1 are shown but for a model with tdelay = 1011 yr. As
expected, and illustrated in panel (a2) of Fig. 3, haloes
now take longer to cross the Zcrit metallicity threshold,
compared to the fiducial model (panel a2 of Fig. 1, which
is on the same scale). This increases the cosmic Population III SFR density, which, although still subdominant,
contributes more than 10% of the total SFR density at
redshifts above z ∼ 20 in the high-mass Population III
IMF run (the corresponding redshift value for the fiducial model was z ∼ 30). The relative increase in Population III star-formation also manifests as an increase in the
hydrogen photoionization rate, which is also enhanced
relative to the fiducial model. Indeed, the contribution
of Population III stars to the hydrogen photoionization
rate at z = 10 is 10% for the high-mass case, whereas the
contribution was less than 1% at this redshift in our fiducial model. Thus for tdelay = 1011 yr, the contribution of
Population III stars to reionization is subdominant but
significant. Note that these numbers are slightly different for the low-mass case for the same mixing function
and tdelay . In general, low mass Population III star formation lasts longer than for the high-mass IMF. This
is because the metal yields of high mass Population III
stars is higher than those of low mass stars, resulting
in larger chemical feedback, and earlier termination of
Population III.
Fig 4 shows the results of the model with tdelay = 1012
yr, for which the mixing of metal metals is even more
gradual. The impact of Population III on cosmic starformation and the ionizing photon budget is now increased in magnitude relative to the previous case shown
in Fig. 3. For instance, all star formation for z & 10 in
this model is Population III, regardless of the Population III IMF. Thus the process of hydrogen reionization
is almost single-handedly carried out by Population III
stars. The contribution of Population III stars to the
hydrogen photoionization rate at z = 10 is about 60%
for the high-mass case, and 100% for the low-mass case.
Their contribution to the cosmic SFR density at z = 10
is about 20% for the high-mass case, and 80% for the
low-mass case. Similar to the results in Fig. 3, the Population III contribution is higher for low-mass Population III IMF because of weaker chemical feedback.
Fig. 2 helps in visualising the effect of the mixing function on our model. The self-enrichment time scale in the

two variant models is longer than that in the fiducial
model by more than an order of magnitude. The increase, however, is still less that tdelay , as only a fraction
of metals are required to increase halo metallicity beyond
Zcrit .
A general lesson from above is that due to constraints
imposed by the measurements of cosmic SFR density, the
hydrogen photoionization rate, and the electron scattering optical depth, the contribution of Population III stars
to reionization can be enhanced only by increasing the
metal mixing time scale assumed in the model. This
contribution is generally predicted to be small unless the
self-enrichment time scale is & 3 × 108 yr.
3.3. Chemical Enrichment Constraints on the

Contribution of Population III to Reioinization
By varying the assumptions about the Population III
IMF and the metal mixing timescale, we have seen that
the the self-enrichment timescale can take on values between 3 × 106 –3 × 108 years, dramatically impacting the
chemical feedback which eventually terminates Population III star formation. These degrees of freedom result
in concomitant uncertainties on the contribution of Population III star-formaiton to the ionizing photon budget
of 1–100%, since all of the models were able to match
the star-formation and and reionization observables that
we considered. However, we can discriminate between
these possibilities using accurate chemical enrichment
observations in damped Lyα absorbers (DLAs) at postreionization redshifts. Observations of DLAs can be used
to measure gas-phase metallicities at large cosmological
lookback times with high precision. Furthermore, relative abundances can still be measured accurately deep
into the reionization epoch (z > 6) using metal-line transitions redward of Lyα, even though Gunn-Peterson absorption precludes measurement of neutral hydrogen. In
Kulkarni et al. (2013) we modeled the chemical evolution
of DLAs, and showed how their abundance patterns can
be used to constrain Population III s cenarios. Here we
argue that they can also constrain the contribution of
Population III stars to reionization.
In our model, we assigned a mass-dependent H i absorption cross-section, denoted by Σ to each halo in order to predict the expected distribution of DLA abundance ratios (see Kulkarni et al. 2013 for details). This
assignment is motivated by hydrodynamical simulations
(Gardner et al. 1997, 2001; Nagamine et al. 2004a,b,
2007; Pontzen et al. 2008) and reproduces the observed
DLA metallicity evolution (Rafelski et al. 2012), incidence rate (Prochaska et al. 2005; Noterdaeme et al.
2012), and clustering bias (Font-Ribera et al. 2012) at
low redshifts (z ∼ 3) very well, and takes the form

2 
α−2
M
M
Σ(M ) = Σ0
1+
,
(7)
M0
M0
where the constants take the values of α = 0.2, M0 =
109.5 M⊙ , and Σ0 = 40 kpc2 at z = 3 (Pontzen et al.
2008; Font-Ribera et al. 2012). Values at other redshifts are calculated by mapping haloes at these redshifts to haloes z = 3 according to circular velocity
(Font-Ribera et al. 2012). With this assignment, for any
measurable property p (e.g., abundance ratio [M1 /M2 ])
of DLAs, we can calculate the number of systems with

10

Figure 5. Evolution of mean values of [C/Fe] and [O/Si] DLA relative abundances in all models considered in this paper. Data points
show observed DLA relative abundances from a compilation by Becker et al. (2012). Right panel shows low-mass IMF models, left panel
high-mass IMF models. Our fiducial model (black curves) is consistent with the observational measurements. The high-mass IMF model
with gradual enrichment with tdelay = 1011 yr is only marginally consistent with the [O/Si] data, while that with tdelay = 1012 yr is ruled
out by the data. This constraints the Population III contribution to reionization. Note that the low-mass IMF models are harder to rule
out, as discussed in the text.

different values of p in a sample of DLAs. This is called
the line density distribution, and with Eqn. (7) in hand,
it can be written as (e.g., Wolfe et al. 2005)
d2 N
dl dM
= N (M ) · Σ(M ) ·
· (1 + z)3 .
dXdp
dX dp

(8)

Here, X is an absorption length element given by
dl
c
,
=
dX
H0 (1 + z)3

(9)

dl = cdt is a length element, and p is the property in
consideration. The halo mass is denoted by M , N (M ) is
the comoving number density of halos (i.e., the halo mass
function), and Σ(M ) is the halo cross section given by
Eqn. (7). The quantity dM/dp in Eqn. (8) can be easily
calculated in our model, as properties like metallicity and
relative abundances are known for all halo masses. The
integral of Eqn. (8) over all values of p is just the total
line density of DLAs, dN/dX. The average value of p in
an observed sample of DLAs is given by
Z
d2 N
hpi =
· p · dp · dX.
(10)
dXdp
Fig. 5 shows the result of evaluating Eqn. (10) for p =
[C/Fe] and [O/Si] in our fiducial model and its variants. It also shows the observed evolution of [C/Fe] and
[O/Si] relative abundances in DLAs. The z ∼ 2–4 measurements are from Dessauges-Zavadsky et al. (2003);
Péroux et al. (2007); Cooke et al. (2011) and z > 4 measurements are from Becker et al. (2012), as compiled by
Becker et al. (2012). Over a time period of about 6 Gyr
(from z = 2 to z = 6), these abundance ratios are relatively constant. Furthermore, they show little scatter
around the mean. Solid lines in Fig. 5 show the evolution of these relative abundances in our low-mass IMF
models, while the dashed lines show the evolution in the
high-mass IMF case. Curves with different colors indicate different delay times.
Our fiducial model agrees with data for both [C/Fe]
as well as [O/Si]. In this redshift range, the mean values of these abundance ratios in this model are governed
by the Population II IMF as the contribution of Popula-

tion III stars is erased in all but the smallest haloes. The
asymptotic value of these abundance ratios towards low
redshift thus simply reflects the relative yields of these
elements per star integrated over the Population II IMF.
However, the variants of the fiducial model, in which
Population III contribution to the cosmic SFR and photoionization rate is higher, disagree with current relative abunance measurements. We first discuss the highmass IMF models. As described in the previous section, we considered two variants where metals are gradually mixed in the ISM over a period of tdelay = 1011
yr and 1012 yr respectively, resulting in corresponding
self-enrichment time scales of 108 and 5 × 108 yr. As
shown in Figs. 3 and 4, the first of these models has
more than 20% Population III contribution to the photoionization rate down to z ∼ 20, while in the second
model the contribution is more than 20% all way down
to z ∼ 10. We now see in Fig. 5 that the model with
tdelay = 1011 yr is marginally ruled out by the existing
[O/Si] data (red dashed curve in bottom panel of Fig. 5),
while the model with tdelay = 1012 yr is completely ruled
out. In the previous section we showed that the contribution of Population III stars to reionziation could only
be enhanced by increasing the metal-mixing time scale,
however this results in a corresponding increase in the
chemical vestiges of these Population III stars. Fig. 5
shows that the DLA relative abundance measurements
actually restrict the high-mass Population III contribution to reionization to be less than 10% for z . 15. The
model with tdelay = 1011 yr acts as a kind of upper bound
on the self-enrichment time scale of haloes and therefore on the role that high-mass Population III stars play
in hydrogen reionization. The [O/Si] ratio is more constraining than [C/Fe] because of significant variation in
the Si yield with IMF: the high-mass IMF produces two
orders of magnitude higher Si yield as Si is efficiently
produced in massive stars due to O-burning.
The contribution of low-mass Population III stars to
reionization is harder to constrain using DLA chemical
data. This is because chemical yields of low-mass Population III stars are not very different from those of Population II stars considered in our models, as the two IMFs
have similar shapes and mass ranges. (There is some

11
difference in the yields due to difference in their metallicities.) Thus we see in Fig. 5 that the [O/Si] values in all
our low-mass IMF models are consistent with the data,
regardless of mixing delay and self-enrichment timescale.
This is also true for the [C/Fe] abundance ratio, although
the values are slightly different from the fiducial case, because the yields are different and the large mixing time
scale slows dilution by Population II yields. However,
even if we cannot rule out the low-mass IMF case, it is
worth noting that the ionizing emissvity of low mass Population III stars is only a factor of two higher than that of
Population II stars. Therefore reionization by these stars
is qualitatively similar to reionization by Population II
stars alone.
Finally, we note that the exact behaviour of the curves
in Fig. 5 depends on the form of the mixing function used.
A mixing function different from that in Eqn. 6 will in
general result in a different evolution of the mean relative abundances. However, the primary result of Fig. 5 is
more general: any Population III star formation activity
that produces hydrogen-ionizing photons at these redshifts will also necessarily produce Population III chemical signatures, which can be constrained using measurements of abundance patterns in DLAs. Also DLA relative abundance measurements at z ∼ 8, using background QSOs or GRBs, could start to constrain even the
low-mass Population III IMF by witnessing the build-up
of the metallicity in halos and change in relative abundances with time because of finite stellar lifetimes.
4. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have demonstrated that Population III stars contribute very little to the cosmic SFR
density and to the reionization history. This is because
the halos dominating the cosmic star-formation rate at
high-redshift rapidly (time scales of only ∼ 107 yr) selfenrich to the critical metallicity, terminating Population III star formation. We quantify this rapid selfenrichment by defining a halo self-enrichment time scale,
which is ∼ 106 yr in our fiducial model. This time scale
is set by stellar lifetimes, and is almost independent of
halo mass. Although this rapid self-enrichment occurs
at different redshift in halos of different masses, the net
effect is to reduce the Population III star formation and
contribution to the hydrogen photoionization rate to less
than 1% of the total at z = 10 in our fiducial model.
Previous studies did not uncover this rapid chemical
feedback of Population III star-formation, because they
did not implement a self-consistent chemical enrichment
model, as we have done here. Since our fiducial model
assumes instantaneous mixing of metals in the ISM, we
studied how relaxing this assumption impacts our results.
By slowing the rate at which metals mix into the ISM,
we found that the termination of Population III starformation can be delayed, thus increasing their contribution to reionization. However, mixing delay times and
the resulting self-enrichment timescales cannot be arbitrarily long. This is because relative metal abundance
patterns in DLAs retain the chemical signatures of Population III SNe, thus providing a chemical record of the
Population III star-formation history. Indeed, we find
that halo self-enrichment timescales significantly longer
than 108 yr produce abundance patterns that are significantly different from those observed in DLAs at z . 6,

and are thus ruled out. As a result, the maximum allowed
delay time implied by existing observations restricts the
fractional contribution of high-mass Population III stars
to the ionization rate to be . 10% at z = 10. Constraints on low-mass Population III are weaker, because
there elemental yields are very similar to Population II
stars. However, the ionizing emissivity of low-mass Population III stars does not significantly differ from Population II stars, and so they do little to ease the tension between reionization constraints and observations
of star-forming galaxies at high redshift.
One possible way in which our chemical constraints can
be evaded is by having an UV photon escape fraction
close to 100% for Population III stars, thus dramatically
enhancing the impact of Population III on reionization
for a given amount of Population III star-formation (and
corresponding heavy element production). However, in
our fiducial model, the contribution of Population III
stars to the hydrogen photoionization rate is low predominantly because their contribution to the cosmic SFR
density is extremely low throughout the epoch of reionization. As a result, even an escape fraction of 100%
does not increase their contribution to reionization beyond that of the Population II stars. Additionally, it is
not clear what physical process could lead to such a dramatic increase of the escape fraction at higher redshifts
(Ferrara & Loeb 2013).
Our work suggests that Population III stars probably do not resolve the tension between reionization constraints and the paucity of ionizing photons implied by
the observed population of star-forming galaxies at high
redshift. Looking forward, our model also predicts that
relative abundance measurements in the highest redshift
(z ∼ 7–8) QSOs, and possibly also GRBs, should begin to probe the era when the vestiges of Population III
star-formation had a significant impact on DLA relative
abundance patterns.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We acknowledge useful discussions with Nishita Desai, Kristian Finlator, Katherine Inskip, Khee-Gan
Lee, J. Xavier Prochaska, Alberto Rorai, and Raffaella
Schneider. JFH acknowledges generous support from the
Alexander von Humboldt foundation in the context of
the Sofja Kovalevskaja Award. The Humboldt foundation is funded by the German Federal Ministry for Education and Research.
REFERENCES
Abel, T., Bryan, G. L., & Norman, M. L. 2002, Science, 295, 93
Alvarez, M. A., Finlator, K., & Trenti, M. 2012, ApJ, 759, L38
Barkana, R., & Loeb, A. 2001, Phys. Rep., 349, 125
Becker, G. D., & Bolton, J. S. 2013, ArXiv e-prints
Becker, G. D., Bolton, J. S., Haehnelt, M. G., & Sargent,
W. L. W. 2011, MNRAS, 410, 1096
Becker, G. D., Sargent, W. L. W., Rauch, M., & Carswell, R. F.
2012, ApJ, 744, 91
Bolton, J. S., & Haehnelt, M. G. 2007, MNRAS, 382, 325
Cen, R. 2003, ApJ, 591, L5
Chiu, W. A., & Ostriker, J. P. 2000, ApJ, 534, 507
Choudhury, T. R., & Ferrara, A. 2005, MNRAS, 361, 577
—. 2006, MNRAS, 371, L55
Cooke, R., Pettini, M., Steidel, C. C., Rudie, G. C., & Nissen,
P. E. 2011, MNRAS, 417, 1534
Daigne, F., Olive, K. A., Silk, J., Stoehr, F., & Vangioni, E. 2006,
ApJ, 647, 773

12
Daigne, F., Olive, K. A., Vangioni-Flam, E., Silk, J., & Audouze,
J. 2004, ApJ, 617, 693
de Avillez, M. A., & Mac Low, M.-M. 2002, ApJ, 581, 1047
Dessauges-Zavadsky, M., Péroux, C., Kim, T.-S., D’Odorico, S.,
& McMahon, R. G. 2003, MNRAS, 345, 447
Dopcke, G., Glover, S. C. O., Clark, P. C., & Klessen, R. S. 2011,
ApJ, 729, L3
Erb, D. K., Shapley, A. E., Pettini, M., Steidel, C. C., Reddy,
N. A., & Adelberger, K. L. 2006, ApJ, 644, 813
Fakhouri, O., Ma, C.-P., & Boylan-Kolchin, M. 2010, MNRAS,
406, 2267
Fan, X., Carilli, C. L., & Keating, B. 2006a, ARA&A, 44, 415
Fan, X., et al. 2006b, AJ, 132, 117
Faucher-Giguère, C.-A., Lidz, A., Hernquist, L., & Zaldarriaga,
M. 2008, ApJ, 688, 85
Ferrara, A., & Loeb, A. 2013, MNRAS, 431, 2826
Finlator, K., Oh, S. P., Özel, F., & Davé, R. 2012, MNRAS, 427,
2464
Font-Ribera, A., et al. 2012, ArXiv e-prints
Fontanot, F., Cristiani, S., & Vanzella, E. 2012, MNRAS, 425,
1413
Fukugita, M., & Peebles, P. J. E. 2004, ApJ, 616, 643
Gardner, J. P., Katz, N., Hernquist, L., & Weinberg, D. H. 1997,
ApJ, 484, 31
—. 2001, ApJ, 559, 131
Gunn, J. E., & Peterson, B. A. 1965, ApJ, 142, 1633
Haardt, F., & Madau, P. 2012, ApJ, 746, 125
Heger, A., & Woosley, S. E. 2002, ApJ, 567, 532
Hinshaw, G., et al. 2012, ArXiv e-prints
Hopkins, A. M., & Beacom, J. F. 2006, ApJ, 651, 142
Hui, L., & Haiman, Z. 2003, ApJ, 596, 9
Kauffmann, G., Colberg, J. M., Diaferio, A., & White, S. D. M.
1999, MNRAS, 303, 188
Kuhlen, M., & Faucher-Giguère, C.-A. 2012, MNRAS, 423, 862
Kulkarni, G., Rollinde, E., Hennawi, J. F., & Vangioni, E. 2013,
ApJ, 772, 93
Larson, D., et al. 2011, ApJS, 192, 16
Leitherer, C., et al. 1999, ApJS, 123, 3
Maeder, A., & Meynet, G. 1989, A&A, 210, 155
Maiolino, R., et al. 2008, A&A, 488, 463
Matteucci, F. 2012, Chemical Evolution of Galaxies
Meiksin, A., & White, M. 2004, MNRAS, 350, 1107
Miralda-Escudé, J., Haehnelt, M., & Rees, M. J. 2000, ApJ, 530, 1
Mitra, S., Choudhury, T. R., & Ferrara, A. 2011, MNRAS, 413,
1569
Mitra, S., Ferrara, A., & Choudhury, T. R. 2012, MNRAS, L1
Mortlock, D. J., et al. 2011, Nature, 474, 616
Nagamine, K., Springel, V., & Hernquist, L. 2004a, MNRAS, 348,
421
—. 2004b, MNRAS, 348, 435

Nagamine, K., Wolfe, A. M., Hernquist, L., & Springel, V. 2007,
ApJ, 660, 945
Naoz, S., Noter, S., & Barkana, R. 2006, MNRAS, 373, L98
Noterdaeme, P., et al. 2012, A&A, 547, L1
Ouchi, M., et al. 2010, ApJ, 723, 869
Pagel, B. E. J. 2009, Nucleosynthesis and Chemical Evolution of
Galaxies
Péroux, C., Dessauges-Zavadsky, M., D’Odorico, S., Kim, T.-S.,
& McMahon, R. G. 2007, MNRAS, 382, 177
Pontzen, A., et al. 2008, MNRAS, 390, 1349
Prochaska, J. X., Herbert-Fort, S., & Wolfe, A. M. 2005, ApJ,
635, 123
Prochaska, J. X., Worseck, G., & O’Meara, J. M. 2009, ApJ, 705,
L113
Rafelski, M., Wolfe, A. M., Prochaska, J. X., Neeleman, M., &
Mendez, A. J. 2012, ApJ, 755, 89
Raskutti, S., Bolton, J. S., Wyithe, J. S. B., & Becker, G. D.
2012, MNRAS, 421, 1969
Robertson, B. E., Ellis, R. S., Dunlop, J. S., McLure, R. J., &
Stark, D. P. 2010, Nature, 468, 49
Robertson, B. E., et al. 2013, ApJ, 768, 71
Rollinde, E., Vangioni, E., Maurin, D., Olive, K. A., Daigne, F.,
Silk, J., & Vincent, F. H. 2009, MNRAS, 398, 1782
Rorai, A., Hennawi, J. F., & White, M. 2013, ArXiv e-prints
Salvadori, S., Schneider, R., & Ferrara, A. 2007, MNRAS, 381,
647
Schaerer, D. 2002, A&A, 382, 28
Schaye, J., Aguirre, A., Kim, T.-S., Theuns, T., Rauch, M., &
Sargent, W. L. W. 2003, ApJ, 596, 768
Simcoe, R. A., Sargent, W. L. W., & Rauch, M. 2004, ApJ, 606,
92
Sokasian, A., Yoshida, N., Abel, T., Hernquist, L., & Springel, V.
2004, MNRAS, 350, 47
Spergel, D. N., et al. 2003, ApJS, 148, 175
Springel, V., & Hernquist, L. 2003, MNRAS, 339, 312
Tinsley, B. M. 1980, Fund. Cosmic Phys., 5, 287
Trenti, M., Stiavelli, M., Bouwens, R. J., Oesch, P., Shull, J. M.,
Illingworth, G. D., Bradley, L. D., & Carollo, C. M. 2010, ApJ,
714, L202
Turk, M. J., Abel, T., & O’Shea, B. 2009, Science, 325, 601
Vázquez, G. A., & Leitherer, C. 2005, ApJ, 621, 695
Venkatesan, A., Tumlinson, J., & Shull, J. M. 2003, ApJ, 584, 621
Wise, J. H., Turk, M. J., Norman, M. L., & Abel, T. 2012, ApJ,
745, 50
Wolfe, A. M., Gawiser, E., & Prochaska, J. X. 2005, ARA&A, 43,
861
Woosley, S. E., & Weaver, T. A. 1995, ApJS, 101, 181
Wyithe, J. S. B., & Loeb, A. 2003, ApJ, 588, L69
Yoshida, N., Bromm, V., & Hernquist, L. 2004, ApJ, 605, 579

