MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

Preprint 12 August 2020

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style file v3.0

High-redshift radio galaxies: a potential new source of
21-cm fluctuations
Itamar Reis1? , Anastasia Fialkov2 , and Rennan Barkana1

1 School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, 69978, Israel

arXiv:2008.04315v1 [astro-ph.CO] 10 Aug 2020

2 Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0HA, UK

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ

ABSTRACT

Radio sources are expected to have formed at high redshifts, producing an excess radiation background above the cosmic microwave background (CMB) at low frequencies.
Their effect on the redshifted 21-cm signal of neutral hydrogen is usually neglected,
as it is assumed that the associated background is small. Recently, an excess radio
background above the level of the CMB has been proposed as one of the possible
explanations for the unusually strong 21-cm signal from redshift z ∼ 17 reported by
the EDGES collaboration. As a result, the implications of a smooth and extremely
strong excess radio background on both the sky-averaged (global) 21-cm signal and
its fluctuations have been considered. Here we take into account the inhomogeneity of
the radio background created by a population of high-redshift galaxies, and show that
it adds a new type of 21-cm fluctuations to the well-known contributions of density,
velocity, Ly-α coupling, heating and reionization. We find that a population of highredshift galaxies even with a moderately-enhanced radio efficiency (unrelated to the
EDGES result) can have a significant effect on the 21-cm power spectrum and global
signal in models with weak X-ray heating. For models that can explain the EDGES
data, we conduct a large parameter survey to explore their signatures. We show that
in such models the 21-cm power spectrum at z ∼ 17 is enhanced by up to two orders of magnitude compared to the CMB-only standard case, and the shape and time
evolution of the power spectrum is significantly modified by the radio fluctuations.
These fluctuations are within reach of upcoming radio interferometers. We also find
that these models can be significantly constrained by current and future observations
of radio sources.
Key words: cosmology: dark ages, reionization, first stars – cosmology: theory –
cosmology: early Universe

1

INTRODUCTION

The faint 21-cm signal of high-redshift neutral hydrogen,
made visible against the background radiation by the light
of the first stars and galaxies, is currently one of the major targets of observational astronomy. The first tentative
detection of the sky-averaged (global) signal from cosmic
dawn, an epoch roughly corresponding to the redshift range
of z ∼ 15 − 27, was recently reported by the EDGES collaboration (Bowman et al. 2018). With the true nature of this
signal still being debated (e.g., Hills et al. 2018; Bradley et al.
2019; Singh & Subrahmanyan 2019; Spinelli et al. 2019; Sims
& Pober 2020), fast advances are being made to validate this
detection using radiometers such as the Large-Aperture Ex-

periment to Detect the Dark Ages (LEDA, Bernardi et al.
2016; Price et al. 2018), the Shaped Antenna measurement
of the background RAdio Spectrum (SARAS, Patra et al.
2013; Singh et al. 2018), Probing Radio Intensity at high-Z
(PRIZM, Philip et al. 2019), the Mapper of the IGM Spin
Temperature1 (MIST), and the Radio Experiment for the
Analysis of Cosmic Hydrogen2 (REACH), and interferometers such as the low band of the Low Frequency Array (LOFAR, Gehlot et al. 2019), the Hydrogen Epoch of Reionization Array (HERA, DeBoer et al. 2017) and the Square
Kilometer Array (SKA) (SKA, Koopmans et al. 2015).
The hydrogen radio signal from the Epoch of Reionization (EoR, z ∼ 6 − 15, e.g., Planck Collaboration et al.
1

?

E-mail: itamarreis@mail.tau.ac.il

© 2020 The Authors

2

http://www.physics.mcgill.ca/mist/
https://www.kicc.cam.ac.uk/projects/reach

2

Reis et al.

2018) and cosmic dawn is produced by atoms located in the
intergalactic medium (IGM) at the rest-frame 1.42 GHz frequency, corresponding to a wavelength of 21 cm. Due to the
expansion of the Universe, the signal redshifts and can be
detected by radio telescopes at frequencies below 200 MHz
against the background radiation, which is usually assumed
to be the cosmic microwave background (CMB). The 21-cm
signal is sensitive to the thermal and ionization states of the
IGM and, thus, probes the formation of the first stars and
galaxies through their effect on the gas (e.g., see Barkana
2018a; Mesinger 2019). As the first sources of light turn
on, their radiation impacts the 21-cm signal through several processes. Perhaps the most important effect, owing to
which the 21-cm signal becomes distinguishable from the
background radiation, is coupling of the hydrogen spin temperature (the effective temperature of the 21cm transition)
to the kinetic gas temperature by stellar Ly-α photons (the
Wouthuysen-Field, or WF, effect, Wouthuysen 1952; Field
1958). Because at the dawn of star formation the thermal
evolution of the IGM is dominated by adiabatic cooling, the
gas temperature is lower than that of the background and
the resulting 21-cm signal is seen in absorption. As the first
population of astrophysical sources evolves, X-ray binaries
form and contribute to the heating budget, driving the temperature of the gas up. Depending on its efficiency, the astrophysical heating can result in either an absorption or emission 21-cm signal at the EoR redshifts (Fialkov et al. 2014).
Finally, the process of reionization takes place, in which ultraviolet (UV) photons produced by stars ionize the intergalactic hydrogen and eliminate the 21-cm signal from the
IGM.
Out of the outlined scenario, the strongest constraints
are on the EoR, owing to it being more accessible observationally. Galaxy surveys provide insight on the process of
star formation and constrain properties of galaxies at z . 10
(e.g., see Behroozi et al. 2019, and references therein); meanwhile, the ionization history is constrained by observations
of high redshift quasars and galaxies that suggest that the
Universe was largely neutral at z & 7.5 (e.g., Mason et al.
2018; Bañados et al. 2018) in agreement with measurements
of the CMB temperature and polarization by the Planck
satellite (e.g., Planck Collaboration et al. 2018).
Radio telescopes have begun to contribute to the understanding of cosmic dawn and the EoR. The tentative
EDGES detection, if true, requires efficient star formation
at z ∼ 20 (Fialkov & Barkana 2019; Mirocha & Furlanetto 2019; Schauer et al. 2019) and, thus, could be the first
real evidence for the first population of stars. Other highredshift experiments are publishing upper limits which, however, are still too weak to significantly constrain theoretical
models (Bernardi et al. 2016; Eastwood et al. 2019; Gehlot
et al. 2019). At lower redshifts associated with the EoR,
non-detections of the global signal have been reported, ruling out possible astrophysical scenarios that include a cold
IGM and/or abrupt reionization (Monsalve et al. 2017, 2018,
2019; Singh et al. 2018). At the same time, upper limits on
the fluctuations in the signal are being set using interferometers such as LOFAR (Mertens et al. 2020), which has
recently allowed us to constrain the thermal and ionization properties of the IGM as well as the amplitude of the
radio background at z = 9.1 (Ghara et al. 2020; Mondal
et al. 2020); other interferometers include the Precision Ar-

ray to Probe the Epoch of Reionization (PAPER, Kolopanis
et al. 2019), the Murchison Wide-field Array (MWA, Barry
et al. 2019; Trott et al. 2020), and the GMRT-EoR experiment (Paciga et al. 2011). Meanwhile, arrays under construction, including HERA, the SKA, and the New Extension in
Nancay Upgrading LOFAR (NenuFAR, Zarka et al. 2012),
promise to provide accurate measurements of the fluctuations from a wide range of redshifts and scales.
The recent EDGES detection (Bowman et al. 2018) has
motivated new directions for theoretical study. There are
two plausible categories of explanations of the anomalously
deep signal of −500+200
mK at z ∼ 17. One involves a baryon
−500
- dark matter interaction that can produce faster than adiabatic cooling of the gas (Barkana 2018b; Berlin et al. 2018;
Barkana et al. 2018; Muñoz & Loeb 2018; Liu et al. 2019).
The other category, which we focus on in this paper, involves
an excess radio background at high redshifts above the level
of the CMB (Bowman et al. 2018; Feng & Holder 2018;
Ewall-Wice et al. 2018; Fialkov & Barkana 2019; Mirocha
& Furlanetto 2019; Ewall-Wice et al. 2020). High-redshift
sources, such as radio loud active galactic nuclei (AGN, Urry
& Padovani 1995; Biermann et al. 2014; Bolgar et al. 2018;
Ewall-Wice et al. 2018, 2020) or star-forming galaxies (Condon 1992; Jana et al. 2019), could contribute to the radio
background, thus affecting the 21-cm signal. The properties
of typical high-redshift radio galaxies are poorly understood
due to the lack of sensitive observations. Bright radio galaxies are seen out to z ∼ 5 and are extremely rare (Miley &
De Breuck 2008), while the unresolved population might be
contributing to the diffuse radio background as suggested by
Bridle (1967). The excess of the radio background above the
CMB level, observed by ARCADE2 (Fixsen et al. 2011; Seiffert et al. 2011) and confirmed by LWA1 (Dowell & Taylor
2018), could partially be explained by a population of highredshift unresolved sources, although it is still highly uncertain what fraction of the excess is of extragalactic origin
(e.g., see Subrahmanyan & Cowsik 2013). Dowell & Taylor
(2018) showed that the observed excess has a spectral index
of −2.58 and a brightness temperature of ∼ 603 K at the
rest-frame 21-cm frequency.
Assuming a phenomenological parameterization of a
high-redshift radio excess with a synchrotron spectrum, Fialkov & Barkana (2019) showed that it could explain the
EDGES signal even if it made up only a small fraction (half
a percent) of the excess observed by ARCADE2 and LWA1.
Such a contribution could be created by exotic agents, e.g.,
annihilating dark matter or super-conducting cosmic strings
(Fraser et al. 2018; Pospelov et al. 2018; Brandenberger et al.
2019). Such models are generally less strongly constrained
by other observations than the dark matter cooling models
from the alternative class of explanations. Still, astrophysical
radio sources would provide a much more natural explanation of an early radio excess. However, all proposed models
face challenges to create such a strong excess radio emission
as required by EDGES. For example, Mirocha & Furlanetto
(2019) assumed a ratio emissivity proportional to the star
formation rate (SFR), as observed for present-day galaxies
(Gürkan et al. 2018), and found that high redshift galaxies
need to be 1000 times brighter in radio than their presentday counterparts in order to explain the EDGES signal.
Ewall-Wice et al. (2020) explored the possibility of radioloud accretion onto black holes. One of the difficulties of this
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

Radio galaxies: 21-cm fluctuations
model is the expected suppression of synchrotron emission
from relativistic electrons due to inverse Compton scattering
of these electrons off the CMB, which is stronger at high redshifts than today owing to the higher energy density of the
CMB (Ghisellini et al. 2014; Saxena et al. 2017). Jana et al.
(2019) considered radio emission from supernova explosions
of massive population III stars. However, this model also
predicts the production of cosmic rays which can heat the
IGM and significantly counteract the effect of the enhanced
radio background on the 21-cm signal.
All the above-mentioned studies focused on the implications of an anomalously strong and smooth excess radio
background on the global 21-cm signal, with the exception
of Fialkov & Barkana (2019) who considered the impact of
a smooth background on the 21-cm fluctuations but also derived an analytical formula to include the radio background
fluctuations in the linear regime. In this work we explore the
21-cm implications of an excess radio background produced
by galactic halos, accounting fully for its non-linear spatial
inhomogeneity. We focus on three main points: (1) assuming
that the radio emission scales with the SFR of each galactic halo, we use semi-numerical methods to explore the impact of a non-uniform radio background on both the global
21-cm signal and the fluctuations; (2) we quantify the contribution of a standard population (i.e., not normalized to
explain EDGES) of radio galaxies to both the global 21-cm
signal and the fluctuations; and (3) we conduct a large parameter study to investigate the implications of the EDGESmotivated scenarios for the 21-cm power spectra.
This paper is organized as follows: In Âğ 2 we briefly
review our 21-cm simulation. In Âğ 3 we describe the framework used to include the excess radio background in the
simulation and summarize the effects of the excess radio
background on the 21-cm signal. In Âğ 4 we explore the
signature of the radio background fluctuations on the 21-cm
signal. In Âğ 5 we consider a standard population of highredshift radio galaxies (too weak to explain EDGES), and
explore their signature in the 21-cm signal. In Âğ 6 we perform a parameter study, looking at the range of possible 21cm power spectra in model that fit the EDGES global signal
result and constrain model parameters using the EDGES detection. We summarize in Âğ 7. Throughout this paper we
adopt cosmological parameters from Planck Collaboration
et al. (2014). All scales and wavenumbers are in comoving
units.

2

METHODS

We use our own semi-numerical code to calculate the 21cm signal (e.g., Visbal et al. 2012; Fialkov & Barkana 2014;
Cohen et al. 2017; Fialkov & Barkana 2019). The simulation computes all the required ingredients necessary for the
evaluation of the 21-cm signal, such as the density and kinetic temperature of the gas, the coupling coefficient, spin
temperature and the neutral fraction. All these quantities
are calculated on a 1283 grid (for the purposes of this work)
with a resolution of 3 comoving Mpc. At the output of the
simulation we obtain cubes of the 21-cm brightness temperature and calculate the global signal and its spherically averaged power spectrum at every redshift. The code was originally inspired by the architecture of 21cmFAST (Mesinger
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

3

et al. 2011), but has a completely independent implementation and some different ingredients.
The initial conditions generator receives as inputs power
spectra of density and velocity fields (calculated using the
publicly available code CAMB, Lewis et al. 2000) and outputs three-dimensional cubes of density fluctuations and
relative velocity between dark matter and baryons (Tseliakhovich & Hirata 2010). The density and velocity fields
are evolved using linear perturbation theory. The number
of dark matter halos in each cell of 33 comoving Mpc3 is
determined based on the values of the local density and relative velocity and is derived at each redshift using a modified Press-Schechter model (Press & Schechter 1974; Sheth
& Tormen 1999; Barkana & Loeb 2004).
Galaxies are assumed to form in halos with circular velocity higher than a minimum threshold, Vc , in which stars
form with a star formation efficiency f∗ . The circular velocity is related to the minimum mass M of dark matter halo
in which stars can form through
Vc = 16.9



M
8
10 M

 1/3 



 1/6 

1 + z 1/2 Ωm h2
∆c 1/6
km s−1 ,
10
0.141
18π 2
(1)

where ∆c is the ratio between the collapsed density and
the critical density at the time of collapse, and equals 18π 2
for spherical collapse. In addition to this cutoff, we also
implement suppression in star formation (realized as an
environment-dependent boost in the minimum mass of star
forming halos) due to the relative velocity between dark matter and baryons (Tseliakhovich & Hirata 2010; Fialkov et al.
2012), Lyman-Werner feedback (Haiman et al. 1997; Fialkov
et al. 2013), and photoheating feedback (Rees 1986; Sobacchi & Mesinger 2013; Cohen et al. 2016). The efficiency f∗ is
assumed to be constant for halos above the atomic cooling
threshold corresponding to Vc = 16.5 km s−1 , and features
a logarithmic suppression in halos down to the molecular
cooling threshold of Vc = 4.2 km s−1 (for details see Cohen
et al. 2019).
Given a population of galaxies we calculate the radiation fields that affect the IGM and, thus, the 21-cm signal.
The intensity of the Ly-α radiation, Jα , is calculated assuming galaxies contain population II stars (the modification of
radiation intensities that corresponds to population III stars
is small compared to the wide range of astrophysical parameters that we consider here). Jα regulates the strength of
the WF coupling and also contributes to the heating of the
IGM (see below). The X-ray luminosity of galactic halos is
assumed to scale with their star formation rate, as is the
case for observed galaxies (e.g., Mineo et al. 2012; Fragos
et al. 2013; Fialkov et al. 2014; Pacucci et al. 2014), with an
efficiency factor fX , where fX = 1 corresponds to the X-ray
luminosity of present-day galaxies located in low-metallicity
regions. For the majority of this work we assume that the
X-ray spectral energy distribution (SED) has a power law
shape with a slope α and a low-frequency cutoff νmin . However, we also make use of a realistic SED derived by Fragos
et al. (2013) for a population of high-redshift X-ray binaries.
This SED peaks at energies of ∼ 3 keV, resulting in a relatively hard X-ray emission. Its effects on the 21-cm signal
(compared to a softer power-law SED) have been discussed
by Fialkov et al. (2014). Reionization is implemented us-

4

Reis et al.

ing the excursion set formalism (Furlanetto et al. 2004), in
which a region is assumed to be ionized if the collapsed fraction exceeds a ζ −1 threshold, where ζ is the overall ionizing
efficiency of sources. In our models there is one-to-one correspondence between ζ and the CMB optical depth, τ (when
other parameters are fixed, see discussion in Cohen et al.
2019), and higher values of ζ at higher Vc are needed to give
the same τ. Because τ (rather than ζ) is constrained observationally (e.g., by the Planck satellite Planck Collaboration
et al. 2018), we usually choose to work with τ. The ionizing
photons are assumed to travel up to a maximum distance set
by the mean free path, Rmfp (e.g., Greig & Mesinger 2015).
Finally, an excess radio background above the CMB temperature can be present, and its impact on the 21-cm signal
is reviewed in the next section. Fialkov & Barkana (2019)
considered a homogeneous external radio background model
(i.e., not constrained to be directly related to the astrophysical sources) with a synchrotron spectrum of spectral index
β = −2.6 and amplitude Ar relatively to the CMB at the
reference frequency of 78 MHz (the central frequency of the
absorption trough detected by EDGES). In such a model,
the excess radio background over the CMB at redshift z and
at the intrinsic 21-cm frequency of 1.42 GHz is given by

1420 β
TRadio = 2.725(1 + z) ×
Ar K ,
78(1 + z)


(2)

where 2.725 K is the CMB temperature today. Our model,
thus, is based on eight free parameters: f∗ , Vc , fX , α, νmin ,
τ (or ζ), Rmfp and the amplitude of the radio background.
See Cohen et al. (2019) and Fialkov & Barkana (2019) for
more details on the semi-numerical simulation.
The interplay between different radiative fields in their
impact on the 21-cm signal is non-trivial owing to the fact
that the different fields can produce 21-cm fluctuations at
different scales. In addition, the contribution of these different sources of 21-cm fluctuations can either correlate or anticorrelate. For example, Ly-α radiation acts to deepen the
absorption signal via the WF coupling, while (when the gas
is colder than the background radiation) X-rays tend to reduce it by heating up the gas. Therefore, the contributions of
the Ly-α and X-ray fields to the 21-cm signal anti-correlate,
creating two peaks in the 21-cm power spectrum when seen
at a fixed comoving scale as a function of redshift (e.g., see
Cohen et al. 2018, and also Fig. 2 below). The highestredshift cosmic dawn peak is typically dominated by Ly-α
emission and can be located anywhere between z ∼ 13 − 35
(e.g., Fig.4 of Cohen et al. 2018). The presence or absence
of the X-ray peak (at z . 25) depends on the properties of
the X-ray sources, most importantly on their SED (Fialkov
et al. 2014; Pacucci et al. 2014; Fialkov & Barkana 2014;
Cohen et al. 2018). Hard X-ray photons with νmin & 1 keV
have a long mean free path of a few hundred comoving Mpc,
washing out X-ray fluctuations. In this case the X-ray peak
might not be apparent in the power spectrum. On the other
hand, soft X-ray sources (loosely defined as sources with an
SED peaking at frequencies below νmin ∼ 1 keV) are efficient
in heating up the gas on smaller scales and thus imprint
the X-ray peak in the power spectrum. At lower redshifts,
a reionization peak is typically present with the maximum
power at the redshift corresponding to a neutral fraction of
∼ 50%. The effect of an enhanced radio background, and

how it might modify this picture, are described in the rest
of this paper.
In this work we use an upgraded version of our code. Instead of the phenomenological homogeneous external radio
background, we consider a galactic radio background, i.e.,
a fluctuating field produced by radio galaxies (see Âğ 3 for
more details). Moreover, compared to the previous version,
here we include a number of new physical processes that
make our simulation more realistic:
(i) We use a Poisson realization of the mean number of
halos in each pixel (more accurately, the mean number of
halos created in each time step), instead of the mean number itself. Poisson fluctuations in the spatial distribution of
galaxies are important when the radiation backgrounds are
dominated by a relatively small number of rare galaxies.
(ii) We include the effect of multiple scattering of Ly-α
photons on their spatial distribution. While previously Lyα photons were assumed to travel in straight lines between
emission and absorption, here we take into account the fact
that these photons can scatter off the wings of the Ly-α line,
before being absorbed at the line center. This results in photons traveling smaller effective distances from their sources
and enhances the spatial fluctuations in Jα , and thus fluctuations in the coupling field and in the 21-cm signal (Chuzhoy
& Zheng 2007; Semelin et al. 2007; Naoz & Barkana 2008).
(iii) The heating of the IGM by Ly-α photons is also taken
into account. This heating mechanism is significant in models with highly inefficient X-ray heating, i.e., with very low
fX (e.g., Chen & Miralda-Escudé 2004; Chuzhoy & Shapiro
2006; Ghara & Mellema 2019).
We discuss these effects in more detail in Reis et al.
(2020a,b).

3

THE EXCESS RADIO BACKGROUND

An excess radio background enhances the contrast between
the spin temperature and the background radiation temperature, decreases the strength of the coupling between the
spin temperature and the kinetic gas temperature (e.g., Feng
& Holder 2018), and enhances the radiative heating (e.g., Fialkov & Barkana 2019).
The brightness temperature of the 21-cm signal, T21 ,
is determined by the contrast between the neutral hydrogen spin temperature, TS , and the temperature of the background radiation field, Trad :
T − Trad
T21 = S
(1 − e−τ21 ) .
1+z

(3)

Here τ21 is the 21-cm optical depth
τ21 =

2 n
3hpl A10 cλ21
H

32πk B TS (1 + z)dv/dr

,

(4)

where dv/dr = H(z)/(1 + z) is the gradient of the line of sight
component of the comoving velocity field, H(z) is the Hubble rate, A10 is the spontaneous decay rate of the hyper-fine
transition, and nH is the neutral hydrogen number density
which depends on the ionization history driven by both ultraviolet and X-ray photons. The rest of the parameters assume their standard definitions. A useful approximation for
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

Radio galaxies: 21-cm fluctuations
the 21-cm brightness temperature in the low optical depth
regime (τ21  1) is given by


Ωb h
T21 ≈ 26.8
0.0327






Ωm −1/2 1 + z 1/2
0.307
10


T
xtot
1 − rad mK .
(1 + δ)xHI
1 + xtot
TK

(5)

The background radiation is usually assumed to be the
CMB with TCMB = 2.725(1+z) K. However, in the presence of
an extra radio contribution of brightness temperature TRadio
the total background is
Trad = TCMB + TRadio .

(6)

A more subtle effect of TRadio is on TS through its effect on
the coupling coefficients between the spin temperature and
the kinetic temperature of the hydrogen gas (Feng & Holder
2018; Barkana 2018a; Fialkov & Barkana 2019):
xα =

1
16π 2T∗ e2 fα
Jα ,
A10Trad 27me c

(7)

1
κ (T )n T? .
A10Trad 1−0 K H

(8)

and
xc =

Here T∗ = 0.0682 K, fα = 0.4162 is the oscillator strength
of the Ly-α transition, and κ1−0 (TK ) is a known atomic coefficient (Allison & Dalgarno 1969; Zygelman 2005). Given
these coupling coefficients, the spin temperature is
xrad + xtot
TS =
,
(9)
−1 + x T −1
xradTrad
tot K
where
xtot = xα + xc ,

3.1
(11)

is the radiative coupling (Venumadhav et al. 2018). Finally,
the radio background also affects the value of the kinetic
temperature, based on the CMB heating recently noted by
Venumadhav et al. (2018). The corresponding heating rate
is


T
x A
T
(12)
rad = HI 10 xrad rad − 1 21 ,
2H(z)
TS
TK
where xHI is the neutral fraction.
In addition to the overall enhancement of the signal
(when it is in absorption), the leading order effect of an excess radio background is to, effectively, slow down the cosmic
clock. In the presence of an extra radio background it takes
longer for the coupling and heating terms to saturate. The
growth of the Ly-α coupling term (Eqs. 7 and 10) is suppressed by a factor 1/Trad . Compared to the case where the
background radiation is the CMB and where Ly-α coupling
is saturated by z ∼ 15 (a wide range of models was explored
by Cohen et al. 2018, see their Fig. 1), in the presence of a
strong radio background the coupling term remains important even at the reionization redshifts. Moreover, in models
where the radio background scales with the SFR, as considered in this paper, the coupling effect on T21 (approximately xα /(1 + xα ) once the collisional coupling is negligible,
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

if τ21 is small) never saturates to unity, but converges to a
different parameter-dependent constant. This is because xα
depends on the ratio Jα /Trad , with both terms proportional
to the SFR. Similar reasoning applies to the effect of the
gas temperature on the 21-cm signal: higher gas temperatures are needed to saturate the heating term (1 − Trad /TK
in Eq. 5), and even before that, the moment of the heating
transition (defined as the redshift at which the gas heats up
to the temperature of the background radiation) is shifted
to lower redshifts. As a result, the global 21-cm signal is
mostly seen in absorption, with the emission feature either
reduced to a small redshift range or not present at all. Also,
with a stronger radio background, the heating fluctuations
do not saturate and can affect the shape of the 21-cm power
spectrum at a much wider range of redshifts than in the
CMB-only case. Therefore, an enhanced radio background
can have important implications for the 21-cm signal from
cosmic dawn and the EoR - the redshift range targeted by
radiometers and interferometers3 .
We note that throughout this section we have assumed
a single value of Trad for each pixel. In reality there are two
additional effects that we neglect. First, T21 in each pixel is
effectively measured with respect to the sky-averaged (cosmic mean) value Trad ; our use of the local Trad for this in
eq. (3) corresponds to neglecting the direct effect of fluctuations in the radio background, which would contribute even
in the τ21 = 0 limit and thus may be seen as a source of
additional noise for 21-cm measurements (but could also be
interesting in itself). Second, 21-cm absorption occurs along
the line of sight, so the anisotropy of the distribution of radio sources around each pixel adds another contribution. We
leave for further work a detailed exploration of these additional effects.

(10)

and
1 − e−τ21
xrad =
τ21

5

Radio background from galaxies

The novelty of this work is in considering fluctuations in
the radio background and evaluating their effect on the 21cm signal. We assume the galaxy radio luminosity per unit
frequency, calculated in units of W Hz−1 , to be proportional
to the star formation rate (SFR),
LRadio (ν, z) = fRadio 1022



 −αRadio SFR
ν
,
150MHz
M yr−1

(13)

based on the empirical relation of Gürkan et al. (2018) and
similarly to Mirocha & Furlanetto (2019). In Eq. 13, αRadio
is the spectral index in the radio band, which we set to
αRadio = 0.7 as in Mirocha & Furlanetto (2019); Gürkan et al.
(2018), see also Condon et al. (2002); Heesen et al. (2014).
fRadio is the normalization of the radio emissivity, where the
average value for present day star forming galaxies is fRadio =
1; while observations indicate a significant scatter, here we
assume a uniform value of fRadio (which we vary over a wide
range), and leave for future work a direct consideration of
such scatter.
We calculate the temperature of the radio background
at redshift z, at the 21-cm frequency ν21 by integrating over

3

We show an example of the effect of the radio background on
the coupling and heating terms in Appendix A.

6

Reis et al.

the contribution of all galaxies within the past light-cone
(following Ewall-Wice et al. 2020):
λ2 c(1 + z)3
TRadio (ν21, z) = 21
2kB
4π


∫
1 + zem
Radio ν21
, zem (1 + zem )−1 H(zem )−1 dzem ,
1+z

(14)

where zem > z is the redshift of emission. The comoving radio emissivity, Radio , is the luminosity per unit frequency
per unit comoving volume, averaged in this spherical integral over radial shells (with a radius corresponding to the
light travel distance between zem and z). We note that this
spherical shell calculation is similar to the calculation of the
X-ray and Ly-α radiation fields in our simulation, except
that for X-rays the optical depth of the IGM also plays a
role while the radio photons are not absorbed in the IGM,
and for Ly-α we take into account the effect of multiple
scattering which requires using different window functions
instead of the spherical shells (Reis et al. 2020b).
Compared to the smooth external radio background
(Eq. 2) which effectively declines with cosmic time, the radio background from galaxies (Eq. 14) is non-uniform and
increases with time, tracing the growth of galaxies. As we
show below, these differences strongly affect the shape of
the 21-cm signal and, thus, the astrophysical parameter constraints implied by the EDGES low-band detection (Âğ 6).

4

THE SIGNATURE OF RADIO
BACKGROUND FLUCTUATIONS IN THE
21-CM SIGNAL

We first present a general discussion of the various effects
of the radio background fluctuations on the 21-cm signal.
As we show here, this effect can vary between models, scales
and epochs, and can have important implications for the 21cm signal in the redshift range relevant for the existing and
upcoming radio telescopes.
At high redshift, when the 21-cm signal is driven by
the Ly-α coupling (and, to some extent, by density fluctuations), the 21-cm fluctuations can be enhanced due to the
positive correlation between the contributions from the radio field and both the coupling and the density fields. During
the coupling transition, individual galaxies produce ”coupled bubbles” around them, where the spin temperature is
coupled to the kinetic temperature of the gas. This can be
seen as an absorption 21-cm feature surrounding individual
galaxies. The radio emission from these galaxies enhances
the contrast between the spin temperature and the radiation temperature inside the same coupled bubbles, which
results in a stronger 21-cm absorption compared to the case
with a uniform radio background of intensity equal to the
mean intensity of the fluctuating case.
An illustration of this is shown in Fig. 1, where we compare the complete model (right panel) to a reference case
with a uniform radio background of the same mean intensity
(left panel). In the reference case we can still see the coupled
bubbles in the 21-cm signal, but their contrast is greatly enhanced in the full model, in which the radio enhancement
is clustered around the galactic halos. To highlight the effect of the radio fluctuations, we have used a simulation with

moderately massive halos (minimum circular velocity of 35.5
km/s, corresponding to a minimum halo mass for star formation of 3 × 108 M at z = 20) along with a high value of
the radio production efficiency fRadio = 1000.
The effect of the radio background fluctuations on the
statistical properties of the 21-cm signal, namely its power
spectrum, is shown in Fig. 2 for various values of fradio and
two different (soft and hard) X-ray SEDs. Here we choose
fairly high values of fRadio to highlight the effects, while models with lower values of fRadio are explored in the next section. We also show two limiting cases: the CMB-only case
(i.e., the case with fRadio = 0) and the ”maximum radio” case.
As we can see from Eq. 5, in the limit TRadio  TCMB, TK
the effect of the radio background saturates and the 21-cm
brightness temperature becomes independent of TRadio :


1 + z 1/2
T
T21 = −26.8
(1 + δ)xHI xtot (TCMB ) CMB mK ,
(15)
10
TK
where xtot (TCMB ) is the coupling coefficient calculated with
Trad = TCMB (and we have suppressed the dependence on
cosmological parameters). In this limit we neglect the effect
of the excess radio background on the heating rate, obtaining
a simple upper limit. In the Figure, we compare the effect of
a fluctuating radio background to a smooth reference case
with the same mean radio intensity at every z as in the
fluctuating case.
We find that at high redshifts, prior to the onset of Xray heating, the inhomogeneous radio background enhances
the 21-cm power spectrum by up to a factor of a few, owing
to the positive correlation between the contributions of the
radio background fluctuations and both the Ly-α and density fluctuations, and given the negligible contribution of
X-ray sources. The boost in power is clearly seen in Fig. 2,
where we compare the effect of a fluctuating radio background for each model to a corresponding smooth reference
case. We note that Fig. 1 suggests that the effect on 21-cm
images of early galaxies may be even more striking than the
statistical effect on the power spectrum.
As the universe evolves, heating gradually becomes
more important and starts affecting the 21-cm signal. As
long as the gas is still colder than the background radiation,
heating acts to reduce the 21-cm absorption (by warming up
the gas) and, thus, heating fluctuations anti-correlate with
21-cm fluctuations from all the other sources. This usually
leads to a local minimum in the 21-cm power spectrum at
the epoch when the fluctuations from the various sources
nearly cancel out (see also Âğ 2). In the presence of the
radio background fluctuations this local minimum shifts to
lower redshifts compared to the smooth reference case (see
Fig. 2). Moreover, as we show below, the details of this signature depend strongly on the shape of the X-ray SED.
In the case of a soft X-ray SED, heating fluctuations are
strong enough (compared to the fluctuations imprinted by
the radio background) to produce a clear heating peak in the
power spectrum. However, with radio fluctuations the height
of the heating peak is reduced by 20 − 30% compared to the
smooth case (with the same mean radio intensity). When
the strength of the radio background is increased, the heating peak is delayed, since the kinetic temperature requires
more time to grow before overtaking the enhanced radiation
temperature. We note that in this model, the heating peak
is seen even in the ”maximum radio” limit.
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

Radio galaxies: 21-cm fluctuations
Uniform radio
150

7

Radio fluctuations

z = 22

100

y [Mpc]

50
0
−50
−100
−150
−100

0
x [Mpc]

−100

100

0
x [Mpc]

100

T21 [mK]
−1000

−800

−600

−400

−200

Figure 1. Effect of fluctuations in the excess radio background on the cosmic dawn 21-cm signal from z = 22. We compare the case of a
uniform radio background (left) to a case where the radio background is emitted by galaxies (right). Both models have the same mean
intensity of the radio background. Astrophysical model parameters are: Vc = 35 km s−1 , f∗ = 0.4, fRadio = 1000. The X-ray and reionization
parameters are irrelevant here, as for this example we focus only on the coupling transition, before the contributions of heating and
ionization are significant. Each panel shows the corresponding 21-cm signal projected in the direction perpendicular to the image. The
projected signal is obtained by taking the minimum value along each column of the cubic simulation box.

In comparison, a model with hard X-rays shows a more
complicated dependence of the power spectrum on the radio
background. In this case heating fluctuations are weaker,
and, for a strong enough radio background, never become the
dominant source of fluctuations. In such cases the heating
peak is not simply delayed or reduced, but is completely
washed out, creating in some cases a single overall peak at a
redshift that is intermediate between the Ly-α and heating
peaks that would occur in the CMB-only case.
To gain more intuition, we next examine which is the
leading source of fluctuations at every epoch (the same analysis for the CMB-only cases can be found in Cohen et al.
2018, for comparison). We estimate the contribution of each
term by allowing variation in the term, while fixing all the
other components to their mean values (only here we use
the approximation of Eq. 5, which is linearized in the 21cm optical depth). The contributions of the density term
(1 + δ), the coupling term (xtot /(1 + xtot )), the heating term
(1−Trad /TK ) and the ionization (xHI ) to the total 21-cm power
spectrum are shown in Fig. 3; note that the contribution of
the heating term takes both the radio and the gas temperature fluctuations into account. We explore the importance of
each term in models with radio background fluctuations for
fRadio = 1000 (again, a fairly high value of fRadio is used to
make the effect more apparent) and for hard and soft X-ray
SEDs; we again compare to a smooth model with the same
mean radio background.
The general behavior in the case with a smooth radio
background is similar to what Cohen et al. (2018) found
for the CMB-only case: the signal is dominated by the coupling term at high redshifts, heating and density terms comMNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

pete at the intermediate redshifts, while reionization becomes important only at the low-redshift portion of cosmic
dawn. As we see in Fig. 3, adding fluctuations to the radio
background strongly affects the signal in the intermediate
redshift range, i.e., the redshift range most relevant for the
cosmic dawn experiments including the LWA, AARTFAAC
Cosmic Explorer, HERA, NenuFAR and the SKA. Specifically, the strongest effect of the radio fluctuations is on the
heating term, 1 − Trad /TK , through which radio fluctuations
and gas temperature fluctuations have opposite effects on
the 21-cm signal; the relative balance is SED-dependent as
can be clearly seen in Fig. 3. We note that there is also a
small but significant effect on the coupling term owing to the
competing effects of Jα (in the numerator) and Trad (in the
denominator) on xα in Eq. 7; these two terms are physically
correlated, but their opposite effects on xα lead to reduced
21-cm fluctuations when radio fluctuations are included.
Fig. 3 also shows that during the EoR, 21-cm fluctuations are only weakly affected by radio fluctuations. This is
due to the fact that as the radio background rises, and has
time to reach larger and larger distances from each source,
it becomes increasingly homogeneous. Also the excess radio
background does not have a direct effect on the neutral fraction xHI , so when fluctuations in xHI dominate 21-cm fluctuations the effect of fluctuations in the excess radio background
is reduced.
It is also interesting to look at the shape of the power
spectrum at a given redshift. Fig. 4 shows the effect of
the radio fluctuations on the power spectrum shape for the
fRadio = 3000 models from Fig. 2. As above, the radio fluctuations enhance the 21-cm fluctuations at high redshifts

8

Reis et al.

Figure 2. The 21-cm power spectrum at k = 0.1 Mpc−1 as a
function of redshift for various values of fradio (as indicated in the
legend) and for two different X-ray SEDs: soft (νmin = 0.1 keV,
top) and hard (νmin = 1 keV, bottom). The values of the other
parameters are fixed: Vc = 16.5 km s−1 , f∗ = 0.1, fX = 1, α =
1. We show the full, fluctuating radio background from galaxies
(solid) compared to the corresponding smooth radio background
with the same mean radio intensity at each redshift as in the
fluctuating case (dashed). We also show a case with no excess
radio background (i.e., the CMB-only case, black dotted line) and
the ”maximum radio” limit (see text, grey dotted line). Finally,
we also show the SKA1 noise curve (magenta) assuming a single
beam, integration time of 1000 hours, 10 MHz bandwidth, and
bins of width ∆k = k.

(when Ly-α fluctuations dominates), suppress them later on
(when X-ray heating fluctuations dominate, which occurs at
lower redshifts for the hard X-ray spectrum), and have a
reduced effect as we approach the EoR. In this figure we
can see that the effect of the radio fluctuations is strongly
concentrated on large scales (low k), since the radio waves
reach far away from the sources, as they are limited only by
time-retardation (unlike Ly-α photons, which have a strict
horizon given by atomic frequency ratios, and X-ray photons, which are attenuated by absorption, particularly for
a soft X-ray spectrum). Thus, when radio fluctuations enhance the power spectrum they give it a redder slope, and
when they suppress the power spectrum they give it a bluer
slope. These are potentially observable signatures of radio
fluctuations.

5

THE EFFECT OF AN EXCESS RADIO
BACKGROUND ON THE 21-CM SIGNAL
FOR A STANDARD POPULATION OF
RADIO-GALAXIES

Previous works exploring the effects of an astrophysical radio background on the 21-cm signal (Mirocha & Furlanetto 2019; Ewall-Wice et al. 2020), were driven by the
EDGES discovery and, thus, focused on models with ex-

Figure 3. The separate contributions of various sources to the
power spectrum at k = 0.1 Mpc−1 as a function of redshift for two
different X-ray SEDs: soft (νmin = 0.1 keV, top) and hard (νmin = 1
keV, bottom). We show the coupling term (blue), the heating
term (red), which includes contributions from both the radio and
the gas temperature fluctuations, the density term (yellow) and
the reionization term (green). The purple line shows the global
signal and the black lines show the total power spectrum. We
show the same models as in Fig. 2, with fRadio = 1000. We show
the models with the fluctuating background (solid lines) or with
a uniform radio background of the same mean intensity at each
redshift (dashed lines).

tremely bright radio sources, far above what is expected
based on extrapolating from observations of low-redshift
galaxies. In order to create a deep 21-cm absorption signal, such as observed by EDGES, the sources need to be far
brighter in the radio band than present-day galaxies (see the
next section for details). Even though a population of weaker
radio sources (more similar to the present-day galaxies with
fRadio = 1) cannot account for the deep EDGES signal, it
is useful to explore the implications of a realistic population of radio sources on the 21-cm signal in case the EDGES
detection turns out to be of a non-cosmological origin (e.g.,
Hills et al. 2018; Bradley et al. 2019; Singh & Subrahmanyan
2019; Spinelli et al. 2019; Sims & Pober 2020). In this section
we investigate signatures of radio sources in the 21-cm signal
for a wide range of values of fRadio , focusing on moderately
enhanced backgrounds.
As we have seen in the previous section, the radioinduced fluctuations in the 21-cm signal anti-correlate with
the effect of X-rays and positively correlate with the fluctuations sourced by the Ly-α and density fields. Therefore, the
net effect depends not only on the properties of the excess
radio background, but also on the parameters regulating star
formation ( f∗ and Vc ) and the X-ray luminosity of sources
( fX and the X-ray SED). In comparison with a reference case
where the background radiation is the CMB, the strongest
signature of the radio background is expected in models with
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

Radio galaxies: 21-cm fluctuations
Soft X-rays

z = 22
z = 20
z = 18
z = 16

Hard X-rays

z = 20
z = 17
z = 14
z = 11

∆2[mK2]

104

9

103

102

∆2[mK2]

104

103

102
10−1

k [Mpc−1]

100

Figure 4. The evolution of the power spectrum shape. Solid lines
show the power spectrum with fluctuations in the radio background, while dashed lines show the power spectrum for a uniform
radio background with the same mean intensity at each redshift.
We show this for the same fRadio = 3000 models as in Fig. 2. We
show the power spectrum for a different set of redshifts in the two
panels since the signature of the radio fluctuations is seen until a
later time for the hard X-rays model.

negligible X-ray heating accompanied by early and efficient
star formation (i.e., low Vc and high f∗ ). Note that even
for a negligible contribution of X-rays, gas in our models
is heated up by Ly-α photons (in agreement with Chuzhoy
& Shapiro 2007; Ghara & Mellema 2019). This effect sets a
heating floor, creates a plateau in the 21-cm power spectrum
(compared to a peak in the case of heating by soft X-rays),
and (to some extent) counteracts the effects of an enhanced
radio background. In Fig. 5 we demonstrate the effect of an
excess radio background on the global 21-cm signal and the
power spectrum in models with moderate values of the radio
production efficiencies ( fRadio =10, 30 and 100) and for fixed
values of Vc = 4.2 km s−1 , f∗ = 0.1 and no X-ray heating
(i.e., fX = 0).
The maximum normalized difference,
CMB−only

Normalized difference =

T21

With radio
− T21

CMB−only

(16)

max T21

calculated over the redshift range of z = 30 − 6, in
the depth of the absorption trough is of 19%, 56%, and
171% for fRadio =10, 30 and 100, respectively. For all
cases the maximum increase (i.e., the maximum value of
CMB−only

With radio ) occurred at z ∼ 12. In addition,
T21
− T21
while in the CMB-only case the 21-cm signal is seen in emission at low redshifts (even without X-ray heating), in models
with moderate fRadio the signal is in absorption for the entire
duration of the EoR.
The effect of a moderate population of radio galaxies on
the 21-cm power spectrum is also significant in these models and is of order 5%, 23%, and 294% for fRadio =10, 30 and

MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

Figure 5. Effect of models with a moderate radio background
on the 21-cm signal for Vc = 4.2 km s−1 , f∗ = 0.1 and fX = 0 and
with fRadio = 10, 30, or 100 (as indicated in the legends). Top:
The global 21-cm signal. Middle: The 21-cm power spectrum
at k = 0.1 Mpc−1 as a function of redshift. Here we show the
case of the fluctuating background (solid) and the corresponding
smooth radio background case (dashed) as in the previous section.
We also show the projected SKA1 sensitivity (magenta) and the
CMB-only case (dotted). Bottom: The present-day excess radio
background (relative to the CMB level shown with the horizontal
dotted line). Note that the contribution of galaxies to the radio
background is integrated over time from the beginning of the
simulation to its end at z = 6. The data points correspond to the
excess radio background detected by the ARCADE2 and LWA1
experiments.

100, respectively. For all cases the maximum difference occurs at z ∼ 13. The difference is calculated as in Eq. 16, using
the power spectrum ∆2 (at k = 0.1 Mpc−1 ) instead of T21 .
We note that using the maximum over all redshifts in the
denominator gives a conservative number, i.e., at some redshifts the relative difference is much larger. Because it takes
time for the radio background to build up, the strongest effect is at the intermediate and low-redshift parts of cosmic
dawn (z . 20) which are the main target of the existing
and upcoming interferometers (including AARTFAAC Cosmic Explorer, LWA, HERA, NenuFAR, and the SKA). At
the EoR redshifts, the signal is strongly enhanced due to the
presence of the extra radio background, and, because there
is no heating transition in this case, does not go through a

10

Reis et al.

null; if realised in nature, this is good news for the 21-cm
experiments.
We also estimate the contribution of such a population of radio sources to the present day excess radio background at the frequencies observed by experiments such as
ARCADE2 and LWA1 (bottom panel in Fig. 5). Here we
assume that the early population of galaxies with enhanced
radio emission does not survive until today (e.g., due to the
redshift evolution of their intrinsic properties) and impose
a cutoff redshift of z = 6 (or higher, see below). In all the
explored cases the contribution of the high redshift radio
galaxies is at or below the background level detected by
ARCADE2 and LWA1, which serves as an upper limit for
such a contribution.
Next, we explore the effect of a moderate radio background in a variety of astrophysical scenarios in a more
systematic way (Fig. 6). We conduct a parameter study in
which we vary fRadio and fX on a grid, assuming efficient
( f∗ = 0.3) or inefficient ( f∗ = 0.003) star formation and assuming Vc = 4.2 km s−1 . Here we assume a population of
hard X-ray sources (using an X-ray binary SED as in Fialkov et al. 2014). We note that for this analysis we switch
off Poisson fluctuations in the number of galaxies in order
to avoid random noise in the results. We calculate the maximum difference (in absolute value) in both the global signal
(top panels of Fig. 6) and the power spectrum at k = 0.1
Mpc−1 (bottom panels of Fig. 6), between a case with an
excess radio background and the same case with no excess
radio background ( fRadio = 0, i.e., the CMB-only case). We
normalize by the maximum value, again in absolute value,
of the no-radio signal: for the global signal, we normalize by
the maximum absorption depth (Eq. 16), and for the power
spectrum we normalize by the maximal ∆2 at k = 0.1 Mpc−1
(Eq. 16, with ∆2 instead of T21 ). The maximum difference is
again found over the redshift range of z = 30 − 6. The result
is shown in Fig. 6.
We find that there is some difference between models
with the excess background and with fRadio = 0 (for otherwise identical parameters) for all the explored cases. As
anticipated, models with inefficient X-ray production are significantly more sensitive to an excess radio background. In
such models we can see a potentially measurable effect (up
to 10%) in both the global signal and the power spectrum
even when the high redshift galaxy population is assumed
to have similar radio brightness to the present day galaxies
( fRadio ∼ 1). On the other hand, for models with efficient Xray heating, a moderate excess radio background has only
a small effect. This happens because in such cases X-rays
quickly raise the kinetic temperature significantly above that
of the total radio background and the heating term in Eq. 5
saturates. For low X-ray efficiencies, models with a higher
SFR density (SFRD) at high redshifts, i.e., with higher f∗
and lower Vc , are more sensitive to the effect of the excess
radio background.

6
6.1

EXTREME SCENARIOS FOR EDGES
LOW-BAND
21-cm observables

We now use our model that simulates radio emission arising from galaxies (as described in Section 3.1) to explore

Figure 6. The maximum normalized difference (in %) in the
global signal (top panels) and power spectrum at k = 0.1 Mpc−1
(bottom panels) between a model with an excess radio background (with fRadio shown on the y-axis) and a model with no
excess radio background ( fRadio = 0), for various values of fX (as
indicated on the x-axis). We show the results for efficient ( f∗ = 0.3,
left) or inefficient ( f∗ = 0.003, right) star formation and assuming
Vc = 4.2 km s−1 , an X-ray population with a hard SED (using
an X-ray binary SED as in Fialkov et al. 2014), and reionization
parameters of ζ = 11.4 and Rmfp = 30 Mpc.

the relatively extreme cases that could explain the anomalously deep EDGES low-band signal (Bowman et al. 2018).
We explain below the differences between our study and
that previously done by Mirocha & Furlanetto (2019). The
analysis here is similar to the one performed by Fialkov &
Barkana (2019) for a phenomenological homogeneous excess
radio background model with a synchrotron power spectrum
(the external radio model). As was mentioned in Âğ 3.1,
compared to the external radio model, radio from galaxies
is non-uniform and features a different time evolution (increasing with time, as opposed to decaying as in the other
case). The effect of the radio fluctuations on the global signal
is minor and the main difference between the two models (in
the context of the parameter constraints with EDGES lowband) is due to the different redshift evolution. Of course,
the new fluctuations do affect the corresponding power spectra.
To compare the two scenarios, we generated two new
datasets of models4 in which we systematically varied the
astrophysical parameters over the following ranges: f∗ =
4

Even though an analysis of external radio background models was done by Fialkov & Barkana (2019), we re-generated the
dataset for this paper because of the revised astrophysical model
as discussed in Âğ 2. Specifically, Ly-α and radiative heating significantly affect the depth of the absorption trough in the scenarios with negligible X-ray heating. The revised predictions for the
external radio background model are discussed in Appendix B.
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

Radio galaxies: 21-cm fluctuations

−500
−1000

min[T21 (68 < ν/MHz < 88)] < 1000mK,

−1500

∆2 [mK2]

Explored models
EDGES models
min/max: EDGES models

20

min/max: External radio
max: CMB-only
SKA sensitivity

18

104
16
10

2

14

(18)

corresponding to the signal detected in the EDGES lowband data (Bowman et al. 2018).
As was discussed by Mirocha & Furlanetto (2019);
Ewall-Wice et al. (2020), the EDGES-motivated models require extremely strong radio sources with fradio ∼ 1000 at
high redshifts. If such a population persisted until lower
redshifts, these sources would overproduce the diffuse radio background observed by ARCADE2 and LWA1. As we
have seen in the previous section (Fig. 5), even a moderate population of radio galaxies with fradio ∼ 100 had to be
truncated at z = 6 in order not to saturate the observed radio background. Therefore, we allow for the possibility that
the enhanced radio emission was a strictly high-redshift phenomena, and introduce a radio cutoff redshift zcutoff , in order
to ensure consistency with the present-day excess radio background. For each model we found the lowest zcutoff for which
the predicted present-day excess radio background does not
exceed the observations.
In Fig. 7 we show the global signals and power spectra
of the models that are compatible with the EDGES lowband data. For comparison we also show an envelope (min
and max signals at every z) of the EDGES-compatible external radio models as well as the maximum signal at every
z of the CMB-only cases (calculated using the same updated
astrophysical framework as the other two datasets). We find
that the power spectra in the radio from galaxies model can
exceed the standard CMB-only cases by two orders of magnitude at z ∼ 20, thus being a good target for low-band
interferometers. At lower redshifts, the power spectra of the
EDGES-motivated models are typically lower compared to
the standard models (and compared to excess radio models
that are not constrained by EDGES; Mondal et al. 2020).
This is because EDGES requires the absorption signal to be
relatively narrow, deep and localized at high redshifts (and
thus not at lower redshifts). This also constrains the astrophysical parameter space, in particular the high-redshift star
formation history (in a similar way as found by Fialkov &
Barkana 2019, for the external radio background model).
The measured high-redshift absorption signal features a
rapid drop into absorption between z ∼ 22 and z ∼ 17. Such
an early and rapid transition requires the WF coupling to
be efficient already at z ∼ 20, implying substantial star formation at even higher redshifts (Fialkov & Barkana 2019;
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

22

−1250

(17)

300mK < max[T21 (88 < ν/MHz < 96)]−

24

−750

106

and

26

−250

300mK < max[T21 (60 < ν/MHz < 68)]−
min[T21 (68 < ν/MHz < 88)] < 1000mK,

zcutoff

0

T21 [mK]

0.01 − 0.5, Vc = 4.2 - 50 km s−1 , fX = 0.01 − 1000, νmin = 0.1 3 keV, α = 1 - 1.5, Rmfp = 10 - 70 Mpc, and τ = 0.03 − 0.089
in agreement with CMB Planck measurements (Planck Collaboration et al. 2018). The radio background efficiency was
varied in the fRadio = 10 - 106 range. We created ∼ 10158
models with radio from galaxies. We also create 5077 external radio background models with a radio background
strength Ar = 0.2 - 1000.
Models were tagged to be EDGES-compatible if they
satisfied the following criteria (Fialkov et al. 2018; Fialkov
& Barkana 2019):

11

100
10−2
35

12
30

25

20
z

15

10

Figure 7. The global 21-cm signal (top panel) and power spectrum at k = 0.1 Mpc−1 (bottom panel) obtained in our exploration of the parameter space. A random subset of the models
that are compatible with the EDGES measurement are shown in
color, with the envelope of all such models shown with dotted orange lines (”min/max: EDGES models” in the legend). A broader
range of models (not necessarily consistent with EDGES) is shown
in grey. The color of each EDGES-compatible model represents
the redshift at which the radio emission needs to be truncated
in order not to over-predict the ARCADE2/LWA1 measurement
of the present-day extragalactic radio background (the colors are
indicated in the colorbar on the right, and each curve is cut off in
the plot at the corresponding redshift). We also show the SKA1
sensitivity (pink), the maximum envelopes of cases with no excess
radio background ( fRadio = 0, dotted red), and max and min envelopes of the EDGES-compatible models for the external radio
background (purple dotted line, ”min/max: External radio” in the
legend).

Schauer et al. 2019). This is possible only in scenarios with
relatively low values of Vc in which the first stars form in halos of ∼ 108 M or lower. Moreover, the need for an efficient
Ly-α coupling sets a lower limit on f∗ . Using the parameter study, we find a lower limit of f∗ = 0.035 and an upper
limit of Vc = 35 km s−1 . In addition, constrained by the
high required Ly-α intensity, the lower limit on f∗ is higher
for higher values of Vc (but only above the atomic cooling
threshold of 16.5 km/s, since the feedback effects noted in
Section 2 limit the contribution of halos below this value).
These constraints can be read off parameter plots like Fig. 8
(see also the similar plots for other parameter combinations
in the Appendix, Figs. B1 and B2).
In the standard CMB-only case the depth of the absorption feature is set by the competition between the efficiency of the coupling and the heating. In such models, the
EDGES detection cannot be explained as, with the Ly-α

12

Reis et al.

Figure 8. The astrophysical parameters of models compatible
with the global 21-cm EDGES low-band measurement and ARCADE2/LWA1 measurement of the present day excess radio background. Colored markers (circles and squares) show the compatible models. The grey dots show all the explored models. Top
panel: fRadio vs. fX . We separate the compatible models into two
groups. The main group (colored circles) shows models with relatively soft X-ray sources (νmin ≤ 1 keV) color-coded with respect
to the values of SFRD at z = 18 (as shown in the colorbar to the
right of the panel). The second group contains cases with hard Xray SEDs (νmin = 2 or 3 keV). Note that the gap between the two
groups is due to the sparsity of νmin values used in the parameter
study. Bottom panel: Vc vs. the total effective radio production
efficiency ( f∗ × fRadio ). The compatible models are color-coded with
respect to the value of fX (indicated on the colorbar, right-hand
side). Red crosses show models that are compatible with EDGES
but not with ARCADE2/LWA1.

heating taken into account, we find5 a deepest absorption
of 164 mK. When excess radio background is added to the
picture, it increases the contrast between the background
and the spin temperature, thus deepening the absorption
trough. The depth of the observed feature, therefore, sets
a lower limit on the possible radio production efficiency. In
the models with the radio background from galaxies it is
the combination of f∗ × fRadio (which we refer to as the total effective radio production efficiency) that regulates the
number of produced radio photons and, thus, the depth of
the absorption trough. We find the lower threshold on the
total effective radio production efficiency to be 136 (bottom
panel of Fig. 8). In terms of fRadio , the lower limit is 356 , i.e.,
the high redshift galaxies have to be more than 350 times
brighter in radio than present-day galaxies. This is consistent with Mirocha & Furlanetto (2019), who found a best fit-

5

This is based on a parameter study of 5077 models with the
CMB as the background radiation that we conducted after revising the astrophysical framework and that we will further discuss
elsewhere.

ting value for the radio production efficiency of fRadio ∼ 1000.
For the lowest fRadio models, the observed deep absorption
can be achieved only if the star formation efficiency is high
(or, equivalently, the SFRD is high, top panel of Fig. 8).
An additional constraint on the value of f∗ × fRadio comes
from the ARCADE2/LWA1 measurements of the present
day radio background. Thus, in Fig. 8 and in the rest of
this paper, we selected as ”EDGES compatible” only models for which zcutoff < 16 to ensure that this artificial radio cutoff occurs after most of the era probed by EDGES
(we leave for the future a more detailed study of gradual
cutoffs). This condition sets an upper limit on f∗ × fRadio ,
which we find to be 1740 for models with low Vc (bottom
panel of Fig. 8). The threshold is higher for higher Vc models, since in these models galaxies start forming later and,
even with the maximum allowed value of star formation efficiency f∗ = 50%, the SFRD can be lower than for models
with lower Vc in which typical galaxies are smaller but more
numerous. Therefore, in the models with high Vc it is possible to have a higher radio production efficiency without
exceeding the ARCADE2/LWA1 measurements.
While Ly-α photons couple the spin temperature to the
temperature of the gas and, thus, create the absorption signal, X-ray photons help to shape the absorption feature. In
the standard scenarios, with the CMB being the radio background, it is the total intensity of soft X-rays that regulates
the location of the minimum of the absorption 21-cm signal
and the steepness of the high-frequency side of the trough.
When an excess radio background is added to the picture, it
contributes to the structure of the absorption trough (as the
signal approximately scales as 1 − Trad /TK ). Therefore, the
intensity and redshift evolution of the radio background can
strongly affect the shape of the global signal. We find that, to
explain the narrow trough detected by EGDES, a fine-tuned
contribution of the X-ray population is required, which sets
both a lower and an upper limit on fX ; these depend strongly
on the X-ray spectrum (top panel of Fig. 8) as only photons
below ∼ 1 keV can efficiently heat up the gas. Specifically,
for soft sources with νmin ≤ 1 keV we find 0.08 . fX . 10,
while for hard sources with νmin = 2 or 3 keV the allowed
fX range shifts to higher values (3 . fX . 1000)6 . As expected, we also find tight correlations among fRadio , fX and
the SFRD (at a given redshift). Models with low fRadio require low fX and a high SFRD to create a deep and narrow
global signal, while models with high fRadio require high fX
and a low SFRD to create a similar feature.
Using a similar model as explored here but without radio fluctuations, Mirocha & Furlanetto (2019) also reported
a lower limit on fX , although of a higher value fX = 10. Two
major differences between our constraint and the result of
Mirocha & Furlanetto (2019) are:
(i) Mirocha & Furlanetto (2019) did not include Ly-α
heating and used a relatively hard X-ray SED (taken from
Mitsuda et al. 1984) that is similar to the SEDs of our hard
X-ray models shown with green squares in Fig. 8. In contrast, we do include Ly-α and radiative heating and also
Note that fX = 1000 is the limit of the prior range set on fX . For
higher values of fX , it is likely that we over-predict the unresolved
X-ray background observed by Chandra X-ray Observatory (Fialkov et al. 2017).

6

MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

Radio galaxies: 21-cm fluctuations
explore soft X-ray SEDs; the latter implies more efficient
heating and permits lower values of fX .
(ii) Another difference between our work and Mirocha &
Furlanetto (2019) is the different prescription for star formation efficiency. While we use a mass-independent f∗ above
the atomic cooling threshold (and a logarithmic suppression below), Mirocha & Furlanetto (2019) assume a massdependent f∗ in which lower-mass halos have significantly
lower f∗ values, and thus, lower values of the SFRD. Since,
as discussed above, only low-mass halos are abundant at
z ∼ 17, their low SFRD needs to be compensated by high
values of fX to create the EDGES feature. They also allowed
redshift dependence in f∗ .
We also note that comparing our results to Mirocha &
Furlanetto (2019) is not straight forward, since these authors
seem to have neglected the effect of the excess radio background on the coupling coefficients. That is, in Eqs. 7 and 8,
they apparently used TCMB instead of Trad = TCMB + TRadio 7 .
They did not consider the effect of the excess radio background on radiative heating of the IGM (that is, neglected
the heating given by Eq. 12). Finally, at least some of the
differences between our results and the results of Mirocha &
Furlanetto (2019) are explained by the fact that each work
applies a different set of conditions to decide which models
fit the EDGES data. Because the total width of the feature
can be comparable to the bandwidth of EDGES Low, and
the overall zero-point is unknown (due to the foreground removal), here we used a relative criterion (i.e., checking that
the changes in the theoretical signals within the EDGES
band are compatible with the detection). However, Mirocha
& Furlanetto (2019) used an absolute measure (i.e., checking that the maximum absorption agrees with what EDGES
have reported). This difference means that we allow for
deeper absolute signals (which have less heating) compared
to the ones selected by Mirocha & Furlanetto (2019).
Finally we note that our constraints on the value of fX
are qualitatively different from those derived by Fialkov &
Barkana (2019) for the external radio background model,
where arbitrarily low values of fX were allowed. This fundamental difference is caused by the different redshift dependence of the radio background, which increases with time
in the models considered here and decreases in the case
of the external radio background with spectral index −2.6
(matching Galactic synchrotron) as considered by Fialkov
& Barkana (2019). An increasing radio background acts to
deepen the absorption at lower redshifts and, thus, X-rays
need to compensate for this effect in order to produce the
narrow trough seen by EDGES. On the other hand, a decreasing radio background helps to produce a narrow absorption feature even with a very weak or negligible X-ray
contribution. Additional differences between the two radio
background models are discussed in Appendix B.

6.2

directly seen by radio surveys (e.g., see Niţu et al. 2020).
Here we explore which of the EDGES-compatible models
predict bright radio galaxies that are expected to be above
the detection thresholds of existing and upcoming surveys.
An individual galaxy of intrinsic radio luminosity Lν ,
calculated using Eq. 13 from the SFR of the galaxy, can be
detected if the corresponding observed flux density Sν
Sν = (1 + z)

Lν(1+z)
4πD2L (z)

,

(19)

where D L is the luminosity distance, is above the sensitivity limit of a telescope. We calculated n(Sν ), the number
of sources per steradian per unit flux density, expected for
each model. As in the previous section, for each model we
do not include redshifts below zcutoff (the redshift where the
enhanced radio needs to be truncated in order to not exceed
the ARCADE2/LWA1 measurements). At each redshift we
find the number density of galaxies that produce a given
observed flux density in the range of Sν to Sν + dS, from
which we calculate the number per steradian. We divide by
dS to get the number per steradian per unit flux. Finally,
we integrate over all redshifts to get the total n(Sν ). The
predictions (in the commonly used combination of n(Sν )Sν2 )
for flux densities at ν = 3 GHz, ν = 1.4 GHz, and ν = 150
MHz, are shown in Fig. 9. We compare our results to current
constraints from fluctuation analysis of deep radio images
taken with the Karl G. Jansky Very Large Array (VLA) at
3 GHz (Vernstrom et al. 2014) and at 1.4 GHz (Condon
et al. 2012), as well as to an individual 5-σ source detection
at 150 MHz (Retana-Montenegro et al. 2018) using LOFAR.
In addition we show 5-σ detection thresholds for current and
future surveys including MIGHTEE (Jarvis et al. 2016), LOFAR (Shimwell et al. 2019), VLASS-3 and SKA (Prandoni
& Seymour 2015).
The source count distributions shown in Fig. 9 are colorcoded with respect to the values of Vc for each model. As
expected, the source counts are dominated by faint sources,
well below the various sensitivity thresholds, for models with
low values of Vc . In such scenarios star formation starts especially early (owing to the hierarchical nature of structure
formation) and radio galaxies are typically small but numerous. On the other hand, the luminosity functions of high Vc
models are dominated by bright but scarce objects. We treat
the observed points as upper limits on our models, since we
do not include the contribution of low-redshift galaxies (below the cutoff redshift for each model). In some of these models the number counts exceed the observational constraints
at 3 GHz, and models with Vc ∼ 25 km/s are disfavored at a
significance of a few σ. Comparing the model predictions to
the expected detection thresholds of the future surveys with
MIGHTEE (Jarvis et al. 2016), VLASS-3 and SKA (Prandoni & Seymour 2015), we see that such observations can be
used to further constrain the subset of EDGES-compatible
models presented in this work.

Radio source counts

In scenarios with high values of f∗ × fRadio , such as the models that are compatible with the EDGES low-band signal,
high-redshift radio galaxies might be bright enough to be

7

13

See the discussion below their Eq. 2.

MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

7

SUMMARY

In this paper we considered three aspects of a high-redshift
population of radio galaxies:
First, our main novelty is that we examined the effect

14

Reis et al.

Figure 9. Radio source counts for our EDGES-compatible models at 3 GHz (top), 1.4 GHz (middle) and 150 MHz (bottom).
Each curve is color-coded with respect to the values of Vc (as indicated in the color-bar on the right). In each panel blue points show
current observational constraints with 1-σ error bars from Vernstrom et al. (2014), Condon et al. (2012), or (Retana-Montenegro
et al. 2018). Vertical lines show 5-σ detection thresholds for future
and current surveys (see legends for details).

of fluctuations in the radio background produced by a population of high-redshift radio galaxies on the resulting 21-cm
power spectrum. We found that the radio background fluctuations affect the 21-cm signal at redshifts and scales targeted by existing and future interferometers, such as HERA
and the SKA. The 21-cm power spectrum is enhanced at
the onset of star formation owing to the positive correlation
between the effects of radio, the density field, and Ly-α coupling on the 21-cm signal. The 21-cm power spectrum is suppressed by the effect of radio fluctuations at later redshifts
when the heating contribution is important, due to the negative correlation between the effects of the radio background
and heating on the 21-cm signal. The strength of both the
suppression and the enhancement of the power spectrum are
model-dependent. For example, we found qualitatively different signatures in models with soft and hard X-ray SEDs.
Also, locally, the radio emission from galaxies enhances the
absorption signal around individual sources during cosmic
dawn. This effect should be important for 21-cm imaging.
Next, we explored the implications, for both the global

signal and the power spectrum, of a normal population of
radio galaxies, i.e., galaxies with radio efficiencies only moderately enhanced over the present-day population. We quantified the effect of the excess radio background, varying astrophysical parameters such as the minimum mass of starforming halos, the X-ray heating efficiency, star formation
efficiency and the amplitude of the radio background. We
found that in models with a low X-ray efficiency and high
star formation rate (which depends on both the circular velocity and star formation efficiency), the radio background
from standard radio galaxies can have an effect of a few tens
of percent on the 21-cm signal. Therefore, it is important to
account for the potential radio contribution in an accurate
21-cm analysis.
Finally, we performed an exploration of the astrophysical parameter space to identify models that are compatible
with the tentative EDGES low-band detection. We found
that high redshift galaxies need to be at least 350 times
more efficient in producing low-frequency radio waves compared to present-day galaxies in order to produce a sufficient radio background to explain the EDGES detection.
Comparing our models to the reported absorption feature,
we found a lower limit of f∗ = 0.035, and an upper limit of
Vc = 35 km s−1 . We also found that the X-ray heating efficiency is restricted to a relatively narrow SED-dependent
range. E.g., for soft sources with νmin ≤ 1 keV the limits
are 0.08 . fX . 10, and the range shifts to higher values
of fX for harder SEDs. We compared these limits to the
prediction of a model where the excess radio background is
smooth and has a synchrotron spectrum (the external radio background model). The major difference between the
two possible models is in the time evolution of the radio
background (increasing with time in the former case versus
decaying in the later). This difference results in there being no limits on fX in the external radio background model.
A major implication of the enhanced radio background is
that it boosts the 21-cm power spectrum by a few orders of
magnitude compared to the standard case where the background radiation is the CMB. Such an enhanced signal might
be within the sensitivity of AARTFAAC Cosmic Explorer,
NenuFAR, LWA, and HERA. Finally, we computed the expected radio source counts for the EDGES-motivated models
and compared them to the existing observations of LOFAR
and VLA as well as to the detection threshold of future radio surveys. We found that existing observations can already
significantly constrain some of the model parameters. It will
certainly be exciting to see the results of upcoming observations of radio sources as well as new 21-cm measurements.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the usage of the DiRAC HPC. AF was supported by the Royal Society University Research Fellowship.
This project was made possible for I.R. and R.B. through
the support of the ISF-NSFC joint research program (grant
No. 2580/17).
This research made use of: SciPy (including pandas and
NumPy, Virtanen et al. 2020; van der Walt et al. 2011),
IPython (Pérez & Granger 2007), matplotlib (Hunter
2007), Astropy (Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013), Numba
(Lam et al. 2015), the SIMBAD database (Wenger et al.
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

Radio galaxies: 21-cm fluctuations
2000), and the NASA Astrophysics Data System Bibliographic Services.

DATA AVAILABILITY
No new data were generated or analysed in support of this
research.

REFERENCES
Allison A. C., Dalgarno A., 1969, ApJ, 158, 423
Astropy Collaboration et al., 2013, A&A, 558, A33
Bañados E., et al., 2018, Nature, 553, 473
Barkana R., 2018a, The Encyclopedia of Cosmology. Volume 1:
Galaxy Formation and Evolution Rennan Barkana Tel Aviv
University, doi:10.1142/9496-vol1.
Barkana R., 2018b, Nature, 555, 71
Barkana R., Loeb A., 2004, ApJ, 609, 474
Barkana R., Outmezguine N. J., Redigol D., Volansky T., 2018,
Phys. Rev. D, 98, 103005
Barry N., et al., 2019, ApJ, 884, 1
Behroozi P., Wechsler R. H., Hearin A. P., Conroy C., 2019, MNRAS, 488, 3143
Berlin A., Hooper D., Krnjaic G., McDermott S. D., 2018, Phys.
Rev. Lett., 121, 011102
Bernardi G., et al., 2016, MNRAS, 461, 2847
Biermann P. L., Nath B. B., Caramete L. I., Harms B. C., Stanev
T., Becker Tjus J., 2014, MNRAS, 441, 1147
Bolgar F., Eames E., Hottier C., Semelin B., 2018, MNRAS, 478,
5564
Bowman J. D., Rogers A. E. E., Monsalve R. A., Mozdzen T. J.,
Mahesh N., 2018, Nature, 555, 67
Bradley R. F., Tauscher K., Rapetti D., Burns J. O., 2019, ApJ,
874, 153
Brandenberger R., Cyr B., Shi R., 2019, J. Cosmology Astropart.
Phys., 2019, 009
Bridle A. H., 1967, MNRAS, 136, 219
Chen X., Miralda-Escudé J., 2004, ApJ, 602, 1
Chuzhoy L., Shapiro P. R., 2006, ApJ, 651, 1
Chuzhoy L., Shapiro P. R., 2007, ApJ, 655, 843
Chuzhoy L., Zheng Z., 2007, The Astrophysical Journal, 670, 912
Cohen A., Fialkov A., Barkana R., 2016, MNRAS, 459, L90
Cohen A., Fialkov A., Barkana R., Lotem M., 2017, MNRAS, 472,
1915
Cohen A., Fialkov A., Barkana R., 2018, MNRAS, 478, 2193
Cohen A., Fialkov A., Barkana R., Monsalve R., 2019, arXiv eprints, p. arXiv:1910.06274
Condon J. J., 1992, ARA&A, 30, 575
Condon J. J., Cotton W. D., Broderick J. J., 2002, AJ, 124, 675
Condon J. J., et al., 2012, ApJ, 758, 23
DeBoer D. R., et al., 2017, PASP, 129, 045001
Dowell J., Taylor G. B., 2018, ApJ, 858, L9
Eastwood M. W., et al., 2019, AJ, 158, 84
Ewall-Wice A., Chang T. C., Lazio J., Doré O., Seiffert M., Monsalve R. A., 2018, ApJ, 868, 63
Ewall-Wice A., Chang T.-C., Lazio T. J. W., 2020, MNRAS, 492,
6086
Feng C., Holder G., 2018, ApJ, 858, L17
Fialkov A., Barkana R., 2014, MNRAS, 445, 213
Fialkov A., Barkana R., 2019, MNRAS, 486, 1763
Fialkov A., Barkana R., Tseliakhovich D., Hirata C. M., 2012,
MNRAS, 424, 1335
Fialkov A., Barkana R., Visbal E., Tseliakhovich D., Hirata C. M.,
2013, MNRAS, 432, 2909
Fialkov A., Barkana R., Visbal E., 2014, Nature, 506, 197
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

15

Fialkov A., Cohen A., Barkana R., Silk J., 2017, MNRAS, 464,
3498
Fialkov A., Barkana R., Cohen A., 2018, Phys. Rev. Lett., 121,
011101
Field G. B., 1958, Proceedings of the IRE, 46, 240
Fixsen D. J., et al., 2011, ApJ, 734, 5
Fragos T., et al., 2013, ApJ, 764, 41
Fraser S., et al., 2018, Physics Letters B, 785, 159
Furlanetto S. R., Zaldarriaga M., Hernquist L., 2004, ApJ, 613,
16
Gehlot B. K., et al., 2019, MNRAS, 488, 4271
Ghara R., Mellema G., 2019, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1904.09999
Ghara R., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 493, 4728
Ghisellini G., Celotti A., Tavecchio F., Haardt F., Sbarrato T.,
2014, MNRAS, 438, 2694
Greig B., Mesinger A., 2015, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 449, 4246
Gürkan G., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 475, 3010
Haiman Z., Rees M. J., Loeb A., 1997, ApJ, 476, 458
Heesen V., Brinks E., Leroy A. K., Heald G., Braun R., Bigiel F.,
Beck R., 2014, AJ, 147, 103
Hills R., Kulkarni G., Meerburg P. D., Puchwein E., 2018, Nature,
564, E32
Hunter J. D., 2007, Computing In Science & Engineering, 9, 90
Jana R., Nath B. B., Biermann P. L., 2019, MNRAS, 483, 5329
Jarvis M., et al., 2016, in MeerKAT Science: On the Pathway to
the SKA. p. 6 (arXiv:1709.01901)
Kolopanis M., et al., 2019, ApJ, 883, 133
Koopmans L., et al., 2015, in Advancing Astrophysics
with the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14). p. 1
(arXiv:1505.07568)
Lam S. K., Pitrou A., Seibert S., 2015, in Proceedings of the
Second Workshop on the LLVM Compiler Infrastructure
in HPC. LLVM ’15. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp 7:1–
7:6, doi:10.1145/2833157.2833162, http://doi.acm.org/10.
1145/2833157.2833162
Lewis A., Challinor A., Lasenby A., 2000, ApJ, 538, 473
Liu H., Outmezguine N. J., Redigolo D., Volansky T., 2019, Phys.
Rev. D, 100, 123011
Mason C. A., Treu T., Dijkstra M., Mesinger A., Trenti M., Pentericci L., de Barros S., Vanzella E., 2018, ApJ, 856, 2
Mertens F. G., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 493, 1662
Mesinger A., 2019, The Cosmic 21-cm Revolution; Charting
the first billion years of our universe, doi:10.1088/25143433/ab4a73.
Mesinger A., Furlanetto S., Cen R., 2011, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 411, 955
Miley G., De Breuck C., 2008, A&ARv, 15, 67
Mineo S., Gilfanov M., Sunyaev R., 2012, MNRAS, 419, 2095
Mirocha J., Furlanetto S. R., 2019, MNRAS, 483, 1980
Mitsuda K., et al., 1984, PASJ, 36, 741
Mondal R., et al., 2020, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2004.00678
Monsalve R. A., Rogers A. E. E., Bowman J. D., Mozdzen T. J.,
2017, ApJ, 847, 64
Monsalve R. A., Greig B., Bowman J. D., Mesinger A., Rogers
A. E. E., Mozdzen T. J., Kern N. S., Mahesh N., 2018, ApJ,
863, 11
Monsalve R. A., Fialkov A., Bowman J. D., Rogers A. E. E.,
Mozdzen T. J., Cohen A., Barkana R., Mahesh N., 2019, ApJ,
875, 67
Muñoz J. B., Loeb A., 2018, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1802.10094
Naoz S., Barkana R., 2008, MNRAS, 385, L63
Niţu I. C., Bevins H. T. J., Bray J. D., Scaife A. M. M., 2020,
arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2004.13596
Paciga G., et al., 2011, MNRAS, 413, 1174
Pacucci F., Mesinger A., Mineo S., Ferrara A., 2014, MNRAS,
443, 678

16

Reis et al.

Patra N., Subrahmanyan R., Raghunathan A., Udaya Shankar
N., 2013, Experimental Astronomy, 36, 319
Pérez F., Granger B. E., 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering, 9, 21
Philip L., et al., 2019, Journal of Astronomical Instrumentation,
8, 1950004
Planck Collaboration et al., 2014, A&A, 571, A16
Planck Collaboration et al., 2018, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:1807.06209
Pospelov M., Pradler J., Ruderman J. T., Urbano A., 2018, Phys.
Rev. Lett., 121, 031103
Prandoni I., Seymour N., 2015, in Advancing Astrophysics
with the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14). p. 67
(arXiv:1412.6512)
Press W. H., Schechter P., 1974, ApJ, 187, 425
Price D. C., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 478, 4193
Rees M. J., 1986, MNRAS, 222, 27P
Reis I., Barkana R., Fialkov A., 2020a, submitted
Reis I., Barkana R., Fialkov A., 2020b, in prep.
Retana-Montenegro E., Röttgering H. J. A., Shimwell T. W., van
Weeren R. J., Prandoni I., Brunetti G., Best P. N., Brüggen
M., 2018, A&A, 620, A74
Saxena A., Röttgering H. J. A., Rigby E. E., 2017, MNRAS, 469,
4083
Schauer A. T. P., Liu B., Bromm V., 2019, ApJ, 877, L5
Seiffert M., et al., 2011, ApJ, 734, 6
Semelin B., Combes F., Baek S., 2007, A&A, 474, 365
Sheth R. K., Tormen G., 1999, MNRAS, 308, 119
Shimwell T. W., et al., 2019, A&A, 622, A1
Sims P. H., Pober J. C., 2020, MNRAS, 492, 22
Singh S., Subrahmanyan R., 2019, ApJ, 880, 26
Singh S., et al., 2018, ApJ, 858, 54
Sobacchi E., Mesinger A., 2013, MNRAS, 432, 3340
Spinelli M., Bernardi G., Santos M. G., 2019, MNRAS, 489, 4007
Subrahmanyan R., Cowsik R., 2013, The Astrophysical Journal,
776, 42
Trott C. M., et al., 2020, MNRAS,
Tseliakhovich D., Hirata C., 2010, Phys. Rev. D, 82, 083520
Urry C. M., Padovani P., 1995, PASP, 107, 803
Venumadhav T., Dai L., Kaurov A., Zaldarriaga M., 2018, Phys.
Rev. D, 98, 103513
Vernstrom T., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 440, 2791
Virtanen P., et al., 2020, Nature Methods, 17, 261
Visbal E., Barkana R., Fialkov A., Tseliakhovich D., Hirata C. M.,
2012, Nature, 487, 70
Wenger M., et al., 2000, A&AS, 143, 9
Wouthuysen S. A., 1952, AJ, 57, 31
Zarka P., Girard J. N., Tagger M., Denis L., 2012, in Boissier
S., de Laverny P., Nardetto N., Samadi R., Valls-Gabaud D.,
Wozniak H., eds, SF2A-2012: Proceedings of the Annual meeting of the French Society of Astronomy and Astrophysics. pp
687–694
Zygelman B., 2005, ApJ, 622, 1356
van der Walt S., Colbert S. C., Varoquaux G., 2011, Computing
in Science Engineering, 13, 22

Figure A1. The effect of the excess radio background on the
21-cm signal. We show the same astrophysical model with (solid
lines, fRadio = 1000) or without (dashed lines, fRadio = 0) an excess
radio background. The other astrophysical parameters are the
same as for the hard X-ray example of Figs. 2 and 3. This example
shows that while the dominant effect is due to the heating term,
the effect due to the coupling term is also significant.

hard X-ray example of Figs. 2 and 3. Fig. A1 shows the evolution of the 21-cm global signal, the coupling term, and the
heating term, with ( fRadio = 1000) or without ( fRadio = 0) an
excess radio background.
As discussed in Âğ 3, the excess radio background affects the 21-cm signal in a number of ways, enhancing the
contrast between the spin temperature and the background
radiation temperature, decreasing the coupling coefficients,
and enhancing the radiative heating. While the enhanced
contrast between the spin temperature and Trad is the dominant effect, in this example we can see that the reduced coupling term is also important, producing a ∼ 20% effect. The
coupling term is reduced from ∼ 1 to ∼ 0.8 after the coupling
transition, due to the excess radio background. The reason
that the coupling term remains roughly constant (after the
initial rise) in the model with excess radio background is
that both the Ly-α and excess radio emission are proportional to the SFR, so that, to a first approximation, the
redshift dependence cancels out in the coupling coefficient
(which is ∝ Jα /Trad , see Âğ 3). We note that in this example,
heating is dominated by X-rays, so the effect of the excess
radio background on radiative heating is negligible.
Next we show, in Fig. A2, the 21-cm global signal for
various models with high values of fRadio . This is the global
signal version of Fig. 2. Radio fluctuations only have a small
effect on the global signal, so the comparison case (of a
smooth radio background with the same mean intensity at
each redshift) is nearly indistinguishable from the full model
in each case. Both the strength of the radio background and
the X-ray spectrum strongly affect the global 21-cm signal.

APPENDIX B: FULL SET OF PARAMETER
CONSTRAINTS USING EDGES LOW-BAND
APPENDIX A: EFFECT OF AN EXCESS
RADIO BACKGROUND ON THE GLOBAL
21-CM SIGNAL
In this section we give further details on the effect of an
excess radio background on the global 21-cm signal, for the
model where the radio background is produced by galaxies.
We begin with an example separating out two different effects. We use the same astrophysical parameters as for the

In this section we discuss the similarities and differences between the parameter constraints (Âğ 6) for the two excess
radio background models discussed in this paper: the main
model where the radio background is created by galaxies,
and the external radio background with a synchrotron radio
spectrum as explored by Fialkov & Barkana (2019).
In order to perform a direct comparison between the radio from galaxies and the external radio background models,
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

Radio galaxies: 21-cm fluctuations

17

be above some threshold value to fit the narrow absorption
trough observed by EDGES. On the other hand, for the external radio background model, there is no lower limit on fX
for any value of f∗ .
(iii) For a given f∗ , the highest allowed Vc is slightly lower
for the radio from galaxies model, compared to the external
radio background model.
(iv) The lowest allowed f∗ = 0.035 is higher for the radio
from galaxies model, compared to the external radio background model, where it is f∗ = 0.019.
(v) The upper limit on Vc = 35 km s−1 is lower for the
radio from galaxies model, compared to the external radio
model, where it is Vc = 47.5 km s−1 .
(vi) The minimum allowed value on the radio background
parameter is Ar = 1.9 for the external background, and
fRadio × f∗ ∼ 140 or fRadio ∼ 360 for the other model. It is
not possible to directly compare these quantities as they are
defined quite differently.

This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by
the author.
Figure A2. The 21-cm global signal for different values of fRadio
(as indicated in the legend) and for two different X-ray SEDs:
soft (νmin = 0.1 keV, top) and hard (νmin = 1 keV, bottom).
Values of the other parameters are fixed (and match Fig. 2): Vc =
16.5 km s−1 , f∗ = 0.1, fX = 1, α = 1. We show cases with the
full, fluctuating radio background from galaxies (solid) and with
the corresponding smooth radio background with the same mean
radio intensity at every z as in the fluctuating case (dashed).
Note that in this case the dashed lines are very similar to the
solid lines, meaning radio fluctuations do not have a significant
effect on the global signal. We also show the case with no excess
radio background (i.e., the CMB-only case, black dotted line).

we had to re-run the models of Fialkov & Barkana (2019) using the upgraded-physics simulation employed here (Âğ 2).
Compared to Fialkov & Barkana (2019), the updated simulation included Poisson fluctuations, multiple scattering,
and Ly-α heating (Âğ 2). We obtained 5077 updated models
with the external radio background, 530 of which agree with
EDGES.
Figs. B1 and B2 summarize the astrophysical constraints of the EDGES compatible models for the two radio
background scenarios. The biggest qualitative difference between the two models is the different redshift dependence: in
the model with a radio background from galaxies the radio
background builds up with time as it traces the star formation activity, and its intensity is greater at lower redshifts;
while in the external radio background case the intensity is
lower at lower redshifts. This difference is reflected in the
astrophysical constraints (predominantly on fX ):
(i) As discussed in the main text, there is no constraint
on fX in the external radio background case, while for radio
from galaxies we find an upper and lower limit for soft Xray sources (νmin ≤ 1 keV) of 0.08 . fX . 10. For harder
X-ray sources these limits shift to higher values of fX as
such sources are intrinsically less efficient in heating up the
gas.
(ii) For the radio from galaxies model, lower values of fX
are allowed at higher f∗ . This is because the overall heating rate (which is proportional to both f∗ and fX ) has to
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

18

Reis et al.

Figure B1. EDGES low-band parameter constraints for the external radio model. Models explored are shown in grey, and models compatible with EDGES low-band are shown in color. The horizontal dashed lines show the upper limit on Ar derived from ARCADE2/LWA1
measurements.

Figure B2. EDGES low-band parameter constraints for the radio from galaxies model. The explored parameters are shown in grey, and
models compatible with EDGES low-band are shown in color.

MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2020)

