MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

Preprint 13 January 2021

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style file v3.0

The subtlety of Ly-α photons: changing the expected range of the
21-cm signal
Itamar Reis1? , Anastasia Fialkov2,3 † and Rennan Barkana1
1 School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, 69978, Israel
2 Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge, CB3 0HA, UK

arXiv:2101.01777v2 [astro-ph.CO] 12 Jan 2021

3 Kavli Institute for Cosmology, Madingley Road, Cambridge, CB3 0HA, UK

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ

ABSTRACT

We present the evolution of the 21-cm signal from cosmic dawn and the epoch of reionization (EoR) in an upgraded model including three subtle effects of Ly-α radiation:
Ly-α heating, CMB heating (mediated by Ly-α photons), and multiple scattering of
Ly-α photons. Taking these effects into account we explore a wide range of astrophysical models and quantify the impact of these processes on the global 21-cm signal and
its power spectrum at observable scales and redshifts. We find that, in agreement with
the literature, Ly-α and CMB heating raise the gas temperature by up to O(100)
degrees in models with weak X-ray heating and, thus, suppress the predicted 21-cm
signals. Varying the astrophysical parameters over broad ranges, we find that in the
upgraded model the absorption trough of the global signal reaches a lowest floor of
−165 mK at redshifts z ≈ 15 − 19. This is in contrast with the predictions for a pure
adiabatically cooling Universe, for which the deepest possible absorption is a monotonically decreasing function of cosmic time and is −178 mK at z = 19 and −216 mK
at z = 15, dropping to even lower values at lower redshifts (e.g. −264 mK at z = 10).
With the Ly-α and CMB heating included we also observe a strong suppression in
the low-redshift power spectra, with the maximum possible power (evaluated over the
ensemble of models) attenuated by a factor of 6.6 at z = 9 and k = 0.1 Mpc−1 . Finally,
we find that at high redshifts corresponding to cosmic dawn, the heating terms have
a subdominant effect while multiple scattering of Ly-α photons is important, leading
to an amplification of the power spectrum by a factor of ∼ 2 − 5.
Key words: keyword1 – keyword2 – keyword3

1

INTRODUCTION

Neutral hydrogen existing in the intergalactic medium
(IGM) prior to the completion of the process of reionization
produces radio signal at the intrinsic wavelength of 21 cm.
The intensity of this signal depends on the radiative outputs
of the first stars and galaxies as well as on the cosmological
parameters (e.g., Madau et al. 1997; Barkana 2018; Mesinger
2019). Owing to these dependencies, observations of the redshifted 21 cm signal with interferometers such as the Square
Kilometer Array (SKA, Koopmans et al. 2015), the New
Extension in Nançay Upgrading LOFAR (NenuFAR, Zarka
et al. 2012) and the Hydrogen Epoch of Reionization Array (HERA, DeBoer et al. 2017), and with radiometers
such as the Experiment to Detect the Global EoR Signa-

?

E-mail: itamarreis@mail.tau.ac.il
† E-mail: afialkov@ast.cam.ac.uk
© 2021 The Authors

ture (EDGES, Bowman et al. 2018), the Shaped Antenna
measurement of the background RAdio Spectrum (SARAS,
Singh et al. 2018), the Large-Aperture Experiment to Detect the Dark Ages (LEDA, Price et al. 2018), the Mapper
of the IGM Spin Temperature1 (MIST), and the Radio Experiment for the Analysis of Cosmic Hydrogen2 (REACH),
are bound to provide an unmatched view of the structure
of the Universe over the epochs referred to as cosmic dawn
and reionization (cosmological redshifts of z ∼ 6 − 35).
Theoretical modeling of this signal is challenging as it
depends on a large number of non-linear and non-local phenomena. A major role is played by the cumulative emission
of ultraviolet (UV) and X-ray sources which affect the 21cm signal within their respective effective horizons of up to a
few hundreds comoving Mpc (e.g., Fialkov & Barkana 2014).
1
2

http://www.physics.mcgill.ca/mist/
https://www.kicc.cam.ac.uk/projects/reach

2

Reis, Fialkov, and Barkana

Even though current state-of-the-art simulations of the 21cm signal (e.g, Santos et al. 2010; Mesinger et al. 2011; Visbal et al. 2012; Fialkov et al. 2014b; Reis et al. 2020a,b)
include major processes that affect this observable, such as
the Wouthuysen-Field effect (WF, Wouthuysen 1952; Field
1958), heating of the IGM by X-ray sources and the process
of reionization by UV sources, not all of the more subtle effects are accounted for and their importance is not explored
for the multitude of possible high-redshift astrophysical scenarios. In this work we focus on some of the more subtle
effects of the Ly-α radiative background.
Ly-α photons play one of the most important roles in
the 21-cm cosmology. The well-known WF effect, in which
the absorption and re-emission of ambient Ly-α photons by
the hydrogen atoms drives their spin temperature towards
the kinetic gas temperature, renders the 21-cm line visible against the background radiation (Madau et al. 1997;
Barkana 2018; Mesinger 2019). Stellar Lyman photons redshifted to the vicinity of the Ly-α line experience multiple
scattering (Semelin et al. 2007; Naoz & Barkana 2008; Baek
et al. 2009; Visbal & McQuinn 2018; Molaro et al. 2019; Reis
et al. 2020a) which affects their spatial distribution, and,
thus, affect the resulting 21-cm signal. The effect of multiple
scattering is rarely fully included in the 21-cm simulations.
In particular, in our past works we accounted approximately
for the redistribution of the photons due to their scattering
in the wings of the Ly-α line (Naoz & Barkana 2008) and
assumed that photons travel in straight lines from emission
until absorption (Fialkov et al. 2014a).
In addition to the WF effect, Ly-α photons play yet
another role by affecting the kinetic temperature of the
gas through the same process of absorption and re-emission
(Furlanetto & Pritchard 2006; Chuzhoy & Shapiro 2007). It
was shown that injected Ly-α photons (i.e., photons that are
cascading into the Ly-α line from higher Lyman levels) can
cool the gas, while continuum Ly-α photons (i.e., photons
that are redshifted into the Ly-α line) heat the gas, with a
net effect that depends on the gas temperature (more details
are given below).
Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) heating (Venumadhav et al. 2018) is another heating mechanism which
is often neglected. This mechanism involves energy transfer
between the radio background photons and the hydrogen
gas, mediated by Ly-α photons. This heating term is important when X-ray heating is weak or absent, e.g. Venumadhav
et al. (2018) reported a ∼ 10% effect at z ∼ 17 on the temperature of the gas in the adiabatic cooling case and with
the CMB as the background radiation. Since this mechanism
was only recently introduced, it is not included in most calculations of the 21-cm signal3 . In the literature, the effect
of Ly-α and CMB heating on the thermal state of the gas
was predominantly considered in scenarios without X-ray
heating (Chuzhoy & Shapiro 2007; Venumadhav et al. 2018;
Ghara & Mellema 2019; Mittal & Kulkarni 2020) due to the
assumption that, whenever present, X-ray sources dominate
the heating budget.
In this work we explore the impact on the global 21-cm
signal and fluctuations of the subtle Ly-α effects that are

often neglected, namely (i) the effect of multiple scattering
of Ly-α photons on the spatial distribution of these photons
and, thus, the WF coupling (Semelin et al. 2007; Naoz &
Barkana 2008; Baek et al. 2009; Visbal & McQuinn 2018;
Molaro et al. 2019; Reis et al. 2020a), (ii) the contributions
to the IGM heating of Ly-α photons (Madau et al. 1997) and
(iii) heating of the IGM by the CMB photons (Venumadhav
et al. 2018). We assess the importance of these contributions
over the vast allowed astrophysical landscape.
This paper is organized as follows: In § 2 we describe
our semi-numerical code for calculating the 21-cm signal. In
§ 3 we focus on the effects explored in this work: § 3.1 details
the calculation of the spatial distribution of Ly-α photons
including multiple scattering, and § 3.2 describes the calculation of the Ly-α heating effect, while we follow Venumadhav
et al. (2018) in the implementation of the CMB heating. In
§ 4 we present the results, exploring the effects of multiple
scattering, Ly-α heating, and the CMB heating for several
representative cases. In § 5 we show the revised landscape
of the 21-cm signals (both global and power spectra) and
compare it to our previous works (e.g., Cohen et al. 2017,
2018, 2019). In particular, Fig. 10 shows the most important
result of this work, namely the updated range of possible 21cm signals in standard astrophysical models, for both the
global signal and the 21-cm power spectrum. We summarize our main conclusions in § 6. Throughout this paper we
adopt cosmological parameters from Planck Collaboration
et al. (2014). All scales and wavenumbers are in comoving
units.

2

SIMULATING THE 21-CM SIGNAL

2.1

Formalism

The 21-cm brightness temperature is given by (Madau et al.
1997; Barkana 2018; Mesinger 2019)

TS − Trad
1 − e−τ21 ,
1+z

T21 =

(1)

where TS is the spin temperature, Trad is the temperature of
the background radiation which is usually assumed to be the
CMB with Trad = TCMB = 2.725(1+z) K (see Feng & Holder
2018; Ewall-Wice et al. 2018; Fialkov & Barkana 2019; Reis
et al. 2020b, for the case with excess radio background above
the CMB) and τ21 is the 21-cm optical depth
3hA10 cλ221 nH
,
32πkB TS (1 + z)(dvr /dr)

τ21 =

(2)

where h is the Planck constant, A10 is the spontaneous decay rate of the hyper-fine transition, c is the speed of light,
λ21 = 21.1 cm is the wavelength of the 21-cm line, nH is
the neutral hydrogen number density, kB is the Boltzmann
constant, dvr /dr = H(z)/(1 + z) is the gradient of the comoving velocity field along the line of sight and H(z) is the
Hubble rate.
The spin temperature is calculated as follows
TS =

xrad + xtot
,
−1
xrad Trad
+ xtot TK−1

(3)

where
3

However, it is included in some of our most recent works (Fialkov & Barkana 2019; Reis et al. 2020b).

xrad =

1 − e−τ21
,
τ21

(4)
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

The subtlety of Ly-α photons and the 21-cm signal
and TK is the kinetic temperature of the gas. The coupling
coefficient xtot is the sum of the contributions of Ly-α photons (xα ) and collisions (xc ): xtot = xα + xc , with the Ly-α
coupling coefficient (Barkana 2018)
xα =

1
16π 2 T∗ e2 fα
Jα ,
A10 Trad
27me c

(5)

where fα = 0.4162 is the oscillator strength of the Ly-α
transition, T∗ = 0.0682 K and Jα is the local intensity of
the Ly-α radiation field. The coupling coefficient due to collisions is
1
xc =
κ1−0 (TK ) nH T∗ ,
(6)
A10 Trad
where κ1−0 (TK ) is a known atomic coefficient (Allison &
Dalgarno 1969; Zygelman 2005). Note that xc is expected
to be small at the redshift considered in this work (Barkana
2018).
Eqns. 2, 3, and 4 present a recursive relation satisfied
by TS and xrad . In our simulation we do not rely on the
smallness of the optical depth and solve these Eqns. iteratively until convergence of xrad and TS , starting from xrad
= 1 (Fialkov & Barkana 2019). Deviation of xrad from unity
is caused by stellar Ly-α photons which transfer energy between the radio background and the thermal motions of the
gas atoms, thus heating up the gas. This, in essence, is the
CMB heating mechanism recently pointed out by Venumadhav et al. (2018) and included in our simulation.

2.2

Cosmic history

The 21-cm signal of neutral hydrogen is predicted to be a
powerful probe of cosmic history between the moment of
thermal decoupling of the gas from the CMB at redshift zt ∼
136 (Barkana 2018) and the end of the process of reionization
which leads to the disappearance of the 21-cm signal at z ∼ 6
(e.g. Weinberger et al. 2019).
After thermal decoupling, the gas temperature drops
below the CMB temperature due to the faster adiabatic cooling of the gas compared to that of the radiation. Due to the
high density of the gas and in the absence of stars (and,
thus, Ly-α photons), the spin temperature is coupled to the
gas temperature through inter-atomic collisions, a process
which results in an absorption trough in the spectrum of
the redshifted 21-cm signal. As the universe expands, the effectiveness of the collisions-induced coupling (xc ) decreases.
If not for the Ly-α coupling, the 21-cm signal would vanish
at z . 30 owing to the proximity of the spin temperature to
that of the background radiation.
The Ly-α photons produced by the first stars enable
the WF coupling of the spin temperature to the gas temperature. As still TK < Trad , this coupling imprints another
absorption trough in the spectrum of the redshifted 21-cm
signal. The Ly-α coupling saturates when xtot  xrad leading to TS ∼ TK .
Cosmic heating is another process that is enabled by
star formation. During the course of cosmic history the neutral hydrogen gas is heated via several channels, causing the
absorption signal to fade and, in some cases, leading to an
emission feature in the spectrum of the 21-cm signal at high
frequencies. A major source of cosmic heating is thought
to be the high-redshift population of X-ray binaries (XRBs,
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

3

Fragos et al. 2013). Indeed, X-ray photons emitted by XRBs
at energies below . 1 keV can successfully heat the hydrogen gas if produced in large quantities; however, X-ray
efficiency of high-redshift XRBs is unknown. If heating by
high-redshift XRBs were inefficient, other heating mechanisms, such as Ly-α and CMB heating, could be important.
Evolution of the hydrogen kinetic temperature, including heating by Ly-α (which we describe in detail in Section
3.2) and by the CMB photons, is given by
dTK
TK
2TK dδb
dxe TK
=2
+
−
−
dz
1+z
3(1 + δb ) dz
dz 1 + xe
2
(X + Compton + Lyα + rad ),
3kB (1 + fHe + xe )

(7)

where xe is the free electron fraction, fHe is the helium
fraction, and δb is the baryon over-density. Heating and
cooling rates in the right hand side of the above equation
are contributed by Hubble expansion, structure formation,
change in the number of ionized particles, X-ray photons
(see Mesinger et al. 2011, for X ), Compton (see Mesinger
et al. 2011, for Compton ), Ly-α photons (see Eqn. 19 for
Lyα ) and the CMB, rad , respectively. The CMB heating
rate was derived by Venumadhav et al. (2018) and is given
by


xHI A10
Trad
T∗
rad =
xrad
−1
.
(8)
2H(z)
TS
TK
rad is non zero when TS 6= Trad , that is, when some coupling between the spin temperature and the kinetic temperature has been induced. As we show below (and as was first
pointed out by Venumadhav et al. 2018) this mechanism
alone has a ∼ 10% effect on the temperature of the gas (at
z ∼ 17) in the absence of X-ray and Ly-α heating and assuming the CMB as the background radiation.
Contrary to reionization which is constrained by observations of high redshift quasars, galaxies and the CMB (e.g.
Weinberger et al. 2019), the timing of Ly-α coupling and
cosmic heating are unknown due to the lack of direct observations and large uncertainties in the properties of primordial radiative sources. Owing to the relatively low number of
Ly-α photons required for efficient Ly-α coupling (Mesinger
2019), this event is thought to follow shortly after the onset
of star formation and well before the processes of reionization and heating occurred on large cosmological scales. Perhaps the most enigmatic process of all is heating of the IGM
as the large uncertainty in the nature of heating sources and
their properties remains.
2.3

Modelling

We use our own semi-numerical approach to calculate both
the global signal and the large scale power spectrum of spacial fluctuations in the 21-cm signal (e.g. Visbal et al. 2012;
Fialkov et al. 2014b; Cohen et al. 2016). Each simulation
is initialized with a set of initial conditions (IC) for density and relative velocity between dark matter and gas (vbc ,
Tseliakhovich & Hirata 2010). In order to obtain a population of galaxies, we apply a modified Press-Schechter model
(Press & Schechter 1974; Sheth & Tormen 1999; Barkana &
Loeb 2004) where the local abundance of dark matter halos
is biased by both the local large-scale density and vbc (Fialkov et al. 2012). We assume that stars form in dark matter

4

Reis, Fialkov, and Barkana

halos with circular velocity above a threshold value, Vc . Star
formation efficiency, f∗ , is constant for galaxies with circular
velocity above the atomic cooling threshold (Vc = 16.5 km
s−1 ), while for lower values of Vc (but above the molecular
cooling threshold of 4.2 km s−1 ) we include a logarithmic
suppression of f∗ as a function of halo mass (e.g. Cohen
et al. 2019). Finally, we take into account the effect of vbc
(Fialkov et al. 2012), Lyman-Werner feedback (Haiman et al.
1997; Fialkov et al. 2013), and photoheating feedback (Rees
1986; Sobacchi & Mesinger 2013; Cohen et al. 2016) on the
minimum mass of star forming halos. In addition, in some
parts of this work (Section 5) we include Poisson fluctuations
recently added to the code (Reis et al. 2020a).
The simulated population of galaxies produces X-ray,
UV, Ly-α and Radio radiative backgrounds that drive the
21-cm signal. For simplicity, we switch off the latter contribution in this work as the main focus of this paper is on
the Ly-α physics and the interplay between Ly-α, CMB and
X-ray heating. The Ly-α field emitted by stars is described
in detail in § 3.1. In the calculation we assume population II
stars and use stellar spectra from Barkana & Loeb (2005).
We also take into account the contribution of Ly-α photons produced via X-ray excitation of hydrogen atoms (e.g.,
Mesinger et al. 2011) to the total Ly-α background when
calculating the WF coupling coefficient.
The X-ray luminosity of galaxies is assumed to scale
with the star formation rate (SFR, e.g., Mineo et al. 2012;
Fragos et al. 2013; Fialkov et al. 2014b; Pacucci et al. 2014).
We assume a constant efficiency factor fX , which is a free
parameter of the simulation (with fX = 1 corresponding
to present day galaxies). In addition to luminosity, spectral
energy distribution (SED) of X-ray photons was shown to
have an important effect on the 21-cm signal (Fialkov et al.
2014b). In our simulation we consider two possibilities: a
power law SED parametrized by the slope, α, and the lowenergy cutoff, Emin , and a realistic SED derived by Fragos
et al. (2013) for a population of high-redshift XRBs.
The IGM is ionized by the UV (ionizing) photons with
mean free path, Rmfp (e.g., Greig & Mesinger 2015), produced by galaxies with ionizing efficiency ζ (we use excursion set formalism, Furlanetto et al. 2004). As was outlined
in detail by Cohen et al. (2019), given the values of other
simulation parameters, there is one-to-one correspondence
between ζ and the total CMB optical depth, τ . Since only
the latter is constrained by observations (e.g., Planck Collaboration et al. 2018), we use τ rather than ζ in the astrophysical parameter scans.
In total, here we employ a seven-parameter model with
the parameters listed in Table 1 along with a brief descriptions and the ranges across which each parameter is allowed
to vary.

3

THE Ly-α INTENSITY FIELD

We now focus on the stellar contribution to the local Lyα background which enables the WF effect4 . These photons are produced by surrounding galaxies and are origi4

When calculating the WF coupling coefficient we also add the
contribution of Ly-α photons generated by X-ray excitation of
hydrogen atoms to the total Ly-α background.

Parameter
f∗
Vc
fX
α
Emin
τ
RMFP

Allowed range

Description

0.001 − 0.5
4.2 − 100 km s−1
10−4 − 102
1 − 1.5
0.1 − 3 keV
0.033 − 0.089
10 − 70 Mpc

Star formation efficiency
Minimum circular velocity
X-ray production efficiency
X-ray SED slope
X-ray SED minimum energy
Optical depth to reionization
Mean free path of ionizing photons

Table 1. Astrophysical parameters and their allowed ranges. Note
that in models used in some of the figures we assume X-ray sources
with a realistic predicted SED of X-ray binaries (Fragos et al.
2013), and those models do not include the parameters α and
Emin .

nally emitted at frequencies between Ly-α and Lyman limit.
There are two main channels to obtain local Ly-α photons:
(i) Photons produced at frequencies between Ly-α and Lyβ are redshifted directly to the Ly-α frequency by cosmic
expansion (continuum photons), and (ii) photons emitted
at higher frequencies are absorbed in higher Lyman series
frequencies and create atomic cascades (injected photons).
About 30% of cascades originating from the Ly-γ and higher
transitions produce Ly-α photons, while no Ly-α photons are
produced by cascades originating from Ly-β (Hirata 2006;
Pritchard & Furlanetto 2006). We denote the chance of producing a Ly-α photon in a cascade from level n by frecycle (n)
and assume that the cascade is instantaneous.
Consider photons absorbed at zabs in frequency νn . Such
photons were emitted at redshift zem with frequency
νn0 (zabs , zem ) = νn

aabs
1 + zem
= νn
,
aem
1 + zabs

(9)

where νn0 (zabs , zem ) < νn+1 (as higher than νn+1 frequencies
contribute to a cascade from νn+1 ) and a = 1/(1 + z) is
the cosmological scale factor. The maximum redshift from
which such photons arrive is that of photons emitted just
below νn+1 :
1 + zmax,n (zabs ) = (1 + zabs )

1 − (1 + n)−2
,
1 − n−2

(10)

as for the Lyman series νn ∼ 1 − n12 .
Usually in semi-numerical 21-cm simulations, the photons are assumed to travel in straight lines until they are
absorbed, in such a case the distance they reach from their
source is:
√
6.0 √
r(zabs , zem ) = 1/2 ( aabs − aem ) Gpc.
(11)
Ωm h
With this assumption, the intensity of Ly-α photons at a
given location x is given by (Barkana & Loeb 2005):
Jα (zabs , x) =

nX
max
n=2

Z zmax,n (zabs )
frecycle (n)
zabs

cdzem (1 + zabs )2
×
H(zem )
4π

(νn0 (zabs , zem ), zem )r(zabs ,zem ),x

(12)

where the photon emissivity, r,x , is averaged over a spherical shell at a distance r(zabs , zem ) from x and r(zabs , zem )
is given by Eqn. 11. Until recently, this spherical shell calculation of the radiation fields was the basis of our seminumerical code (introduced by Fialkov et al. 2014a) which
convolves the distribution of sources with a spherical shell
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

The subtlety of Ly-α photons and the 21-cm signal

5

window function in Fourier space. We have revised this prescription taking the effect of multiple scattering of Ly-α photons into account when calculating the Ly-α intensity field
as is described below and in (Reis et al. 2020a).

3.1

Multiple scattering of Ly-α photons

In reality Ly-α photons do not travel in straight lines as
they scatter off hydrogen atoms multiple times before being
absorbed. This effect reduces the effective distance at which
Ly-α photons couple the spin temperature to the gas temperature through the WF effect. We have first included this
effect in Reis et al. (2020a) and summarize the details of this
calculation here for completeness.
Different photons emitted from the same source at the
same frequency will scatter a different number of times
and at different scattering angels contributing to the Lyα background at a distribution of effective distances from
the source. Distance along a straight line (Eqn. 11) is the effective horizon of this distribution. Out of photons emitted
at zem and absorbed at zabs , we denote the distance distribution of Ly-α photons, i. e. the fraction of photons that
travel an effective distance r, by fscatter (zabs , zem , r). With
this, Eqn. 12 turns to

Jα (zabs , x) =

nX
max

Z zmax,n (zabs )
frecycle (n)

n=2

Z

zabs

cdzem (1 + zabs )2
×
H(zem )
4π

drfscatter (zabs , zem , r)(νn0 (zabs , zem ), zem )r,x ,

(13)

where, as before, r,x is averaged over a spherical shell at a
distance r from x, and, unlike before, we integrate over r.
In the calculation of fscatter (zabs , zem , r) we employ a
Monte Carlo (MC) code to generate both the distance travelled between two scattering events and the angle of scattering. The code follows the approach taken by Loeb & Rybicki (1999) with two modifications: (i) we consider photons
absorbed at Ly-α while Loeb & Rybicki (1999) considered
photons emitted at Ly-α, (ii) the change of all redshift dependent quantities (such as the Hubble rate) is included exactly (in the high-redshift EdS limit). The details of the MC
procedure are given in Appendix A.

3.2

Ly-α heating

The same stellar photons that trigger Ly-α coupling also
contribute to heating of the IGM through recoils of the gas
atoms as a result of scattering. Heating rate due to Ly-α
photons depends on the balance between injected and continuum photons. This is because, as first pointed out by
Chen & Miralda-Escudé (2004), injected photons cool the
gas, while continuum photons heat the gas (we discuss this
point in detail below, Section 3.2.1 and Fig. 1). Historically,
the impact of Ly-α photons on the thermal state of the IGM
was thought to be negligible owing to the assumption that
for a standard intrinsic source spectrum the number of photons emitted between Ly-α and Ly-β frequencies (which redshift into the Ly-α line, and thus constitute the continuum
radiation) is very close to the number of photons emitted between the Ly-β and Lyman limit frequencies (which are the
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

Figure 1. Spectral shape around the Ly-α line center for continuum photons (top panel), which are emitted between the Lyα and Ly-β frequencies and redshifted into the Ly-α line, and
injected photons (bottom panel), which are produced through
atomic cascades by photons emitted between the Ly-β and the Lyman limit frequency. The spectral distortion near the line center
is due to scattering of the photons with the hydrogen gas. Without scattering, the spectral shape of continuum photons would be
J(x)/J0 = 1, and of injected photons J(x)/J0 = 1 − Θ(x). The
difference between the original and distorted shapes measures the
energy transfer between the photons and the gas.

source of the injected photons). With this assumption heating is nearly fully compensated by cooling (Chen & MiraldaEscudé 2004). However, as noted in later works (Furlanetto
& Pritchard 2006; Hirata 2006; Chuzhoy & Shapiro 2007),
the numbers of injected and continuum photons are not similar, with substantially more continuum photons expected.
This is due to the fact that most photons emitted between
the Ly-β and Lyman limit frequencies will cascade into the
2s level and produce two photons with frequencies smaller
than Ly-α. These photons, therefore, are removed from the
pool and do not contribute to cooling. Only a fraction of
these photons cascades into the 2p level and, subsequently,
produces injected Ly-α photons. Given the expected ratio
between continuum and injected photons, Ly-α can heat the
gas to a temperature of ∼ 100 K (Chuzhoy & Shapiro 2006).
At this temperature Ly-α effect is self-regulated and cooling
annuls heating. That is, Ly-α photons cannot heat the gas
to higher temperatures, and, if the gas is heated by some
other mechanism (e.g. by X-rays), Ly-α photons will act to
cool the gas.
For completeness, we note that Meiksin & Madau
(2020) have recently considered a significantly different
setup in which Ly-α photons can cool the gas producing
a deep 21-cm absorption feature as found by EDGES (Bowman et al. 2018). While all of the previously mentioned
works (including this paper) consider Ly-α photons resulting from stellar continuum, Meiksin & Madau (2020) calculate the effect of Ly-α photons originating directly from line

6

Reis, Fialkov, and Barkana

emission (for example from recombination in HII regions) assuming extreme Ly-α line emission strength and profile. This
contribution is almost always neglected in 21-cm studies,
and its importance is unclear, not just due to the sensitivity to complex local effects as studied by Meiksin & Madau
(2020), but also because of a doubtful assumption in their
calculation. They did not account for the Ly-α scattering
that we include here, because they assumed that the scale
of this scattering is large compared to the typical spacing between Ly-α-emitting galactic halos, so that the sources can
be treated as spatially uniform. As we find here and in our
other recent publications, at cosmic dawn the Ly-α field is in
fact highly clustered around the (rare) sources and is highly
non-uniform. Also, within each Ly-α bubble surrounding a
source, the majority of Ly-α scatterings occur close to the
center, on a significantly smaller spatial scale than the scale
at which the Ly-α photons escape (which is the smoothing
scale that they assumed).
3.2.1

Calculation of the Ly-α heating rate

In the calculation of the Ly-α heating rate we closely follow
Chuzhoy & Shapiro (2007) except for relaxing an approximation (see below). Spectral shape in the vicinity of the
Ly-α line is given by (Grachev 1989; Chuzhoy & Shapiro
2006, 2007)
Z x
−2πγ(x3 −z 3 )
−2η(x−z) 2
3a
J(x) = 2πJ0 γa−1
e
z dz
(14)
−∞

−2πγx3
−2ηx
3a

for continuum photons, and


Z
J(x)
∆E = h∆νD dx 1 − Θ(x) −
J0

(18)

for injected photons (Chen & Miralda-Escudé 2004). The
energy gain depends on the kinetic temperature of the gas,
the spin temperature and the redshift. We perform the full
calculation of the energy gain on a grid of these properties
and use these results in the calculation of the thermal history. We verify that our results agree well with the approximations from Chuzhoy & Shapiro (2007) and Furlanetto &
Pritchard (2006) when the kinetic temperature is not small
and these approximations are valid. Finally, the Ly-α heating rate per hydrogen atom (in erg s−1 ) is given by
Lyα = Ṅαcontinuum ∆E continuum + Ṅαinjected ∆E injected , (19)

for continuum photons and for the red wing (x < 0) of injected photons; while the blue wing (x > 0) of the profile for
the injected photons can be written as
J(x) = J(0)e

injected photons, the intrinsic spectral shape can be written
as J(x)/J0 = 1 − Θ(x) where Θ(x) is the Heaviside step
function, i.e. without scattering J(x) = 0 on the blue side
(x > 0) and J(x)/J0 = 1 on the red side (x < 0) of the Ly-α
line center. With scattering included, the intensity seen on
the red side goes into heating of the IGM, while the feature
on the blue side represents energy gained by the photons and
lost by the gas. Thus, in total, injected photons can cool the
hydrogen gas.
Energy gained by the gas per Ly-α photon can be calculated as


Z
J(x)
∆E = h∆νD dx 1 −
,
(17)
J0

,

(15)

where a = A21 /4π∆νD and A21 is the spontaneous decay rate of the Ly-α transition, ∆νD is the
Doppler width of the line; γ = 1/ [(1 + 0.4/TS ) τGP ]
where√ τGP is the Gunn Peterson optical depth; η =
hνα / 2kB TK mH c2 (1 + 0.4/TS ) (1 + 0.4/TK )−1 where h is
the Planck constant and να is the Ly-α frequency; J0 is
the radiation intensity far away from the line center, unaffected by scattering, and J(0) is the intensity at x = 0. The
parameter x is defined as

 r


ν
2kB TK
ν
να
ν − να
x=
−1 /
=
−
1
=
,
να
mH c2
να
∆νD
∆νD
(16)
where mH is the hydrogen mass.
Furlanetto & Pritchard (2006) compared the approximated spectral shape given by Eqs. 14 and 15 to more detailed numerical calculations, and found that the approximation is excellent for TK < 1000 K. This covers the entire
region of interest, since, as we mentioned above, Ly-α photons can only heat the gas up to TK ∼ 100 K.
Examples of the spectral shape around the Ly-α line
center for continuum and injected photons are shown in
Fig. 1 for the specific case of z = 15, TK = 5 K and
TS = TK . For continuum photons (top panel of Fig. 1) the
absorption feature near the line center represents energy lost
by the photons and transferred to the gas. Thus, the gas
atoms gain energy and their kinetic temperature rises. For

where Ṅα is the number of photons reaching the line center
per hydrogen atom per unit time
Ṅαcontinuum, injected =

4πνα dz/dt continuum, injected
Jα
,
nH (1 + z)c

(20)

where Jαcontinuum, injected (in units of cm−2 sr−1 s−1 Hz−1 ) is
calculated in our simulation as described in 3.1 (we separate
the contributions of injected and continuum photons).

4
4.1

RESULTS
Effect of multiple scattering of Ly-α photons on the
21-cm signal

Through its impact on the coupling coefficient xα , multiple scattering leads to redistribution of power in the 21-cm
fluctuations. In this section we explore this effect comparing simulation results with and without multiple scattering.
The only difference between the two types of simulations
is in how the Ly-α background is calculated. In the former
case the new window functions (as described in § 3.1) are utilized, while in the latter we assume that photons propagate
along straight lines and use spherical shells window functions. Example images of the 21-cm brightness temperature
from cosmic dawn, with and without the effect of multiple
scattering, are shown in the top panels of Fig. 2. The simulations assume Vc = 16.5 km s−1 , f∗ = 0.05, fX = 1 and hard
X-ray SED of XRBs. Ly-α and CMB heating are included
in the simulations discussed in this Section.
With this effect included, the strength of the coupling
is suppressed in regions far away from the radiation sources
and enhanced in regions closer to the sources leading to
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

The subtlety of Ly-α photons and the 21-cm signal

Figure 2. The effect of multiple scattering on 21-cm fluctuations.
Top: A slice of the 21-cm brightness temperature from the era
of Ly-α coupling (shown at z = 23), with (right) and without
(left) the effect of multiple scattering of Ly-α photons on the WF
coupling. This example shows a simulation with Vc = 16.5 km
s−1 , f∗ = 0.05, fX = 1 and a hard X-ray SED of XRBs, with
Ly-α and CMB heating included. Bottom: Corresponding power
spectra at z = 23 for the full case with multiple scattering (dark
green) and for the case without multiple scattering (light green).

weaker 21-cm absorption in distant areas and stronger signal
(in absorption) closer to the sources. This behavior is a natural outcome of multiple scattering, with which Ly-α photons
travel shorter effective distances from the sources before being absorbed, and leads to an enhanced large-scale 21-cm
power spectrum (as shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 2).
In addition, multiple scattering washes out fluctuations at
distances shorter than the mean free path, thus suppressing
21-cm power spectrum on small scales. In terms of timing,
in regions around the radiation sources there will be more
Ly-α photons, and the Ly-α coupling transition will occur
sooner compared to more isolated areas. These effects are
clearly seen on the images (Fig. 2) where the purple/black
regions of weak 21-cm signal are the ones far away from the
radiation sources, and there the signal gets even weaker due
to multiple scattering.
Out of the effects listed above, perhaps the most interesting one is the enhancement of the 21-cm fluctuations
on large observable scales. To further explore this effect, we
show (in Fig. 3) the redshift evolution of the 21-cm power
spectrum at k = 0.1 Mpc−1 with and without multiple scattering for several different astrophysical scenarios. At these
scale we see a significant amplification of the power spectrum during the Ly-α coupling era for all demonstrated astrophysical scenarios. This suggests that the inhomogeneous
coupling field is the dominant source of fluctuations at this
value of k and corresponding high redshifts. At lower redMNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

7

Figure 3. The 21-cm power spectra from simulations with and
without the effect of multiple scattering. We assume Vc = 16.5
km −1 and a soft X-ray power law SED with minimum energy
Emin = 0.1 keV and α = 1.5. The results are shown for two different values of fX , 0.001 (top) and 2.154 (bottom), and different
values of the star formation efficiency f∗ (as indicated in the legend). For each value of fX and f∗ the solid/dashed line shows
the power spectrum with/without the effect of multiple scattering. The power spectra are shown as a function of redshift, for
k = 0.1 Mpc−1 . An increase in the strength of the power spectra during the era of Ly-α coupling is seen in all cases. For cases
with weak X-rays, in which Ly-α heating is the dominant heating
mechanism, an increase is seen also during the heating era, which
occurs rather late in these models (these results are discussed in
detail in Section 4.2).

shifts, where Ly-α coupling saturates and the 21-cm fluctuations are dominated by heating processes, the effect of Ly-α
multiple scattering becomes irrelevant in most cases. However, in scenarios with weak X-ray heating the effect of multiple scattering can be noticeable even at low redshifts. In
such models Ly-α heating is a dominant heating mechanism
(see further discussion in Section 4.2) and as such, the spatial distribution of Ly-α photons remains important during
the heating era. Even though Ly-α heating requires strong
Ly-α background and, thus, is very smooth (see Section 4.2),
we do find small intrinsic non-homogeneity, as discussed in
Appendix B.
At high redshifts at which multiple scattering plays an
important role the main astrophysical process that affects
the 21-cm signal is that of star formation, which in our simulation is parametersized by f∗ and Vc . In addition, Fig. 3
indicates that multiple scattering can be important during
the heating era in cases with low fX and/or hard SED, while
it plays a subdominant role during reionization. Therefore,
in order to assess the importance of multiple scattering over
the entire viable astrophysical space, we perform a parameter study varying f∗ and fX while keeping the rest of the
model parameters fixed. We quantify the strength of the
effect of multiple scattering by calculating the maximum ratio between the peak value of the 21-cm power spectrum in
mK2 units, ∆2 , in models with the effect included and the

8

Reis, Fialkov, and Barkana

Figure 4. Impact of multiple scattering on the 21-cm power spectrum (colorbar on the right, calculated according to Eqn. 21)
calculated for different values of fX (x-axis) and f∗ (y-axis). The
effect is calculated at k = 0.1 Mpc−1 . We use Vc = 16.5 km s−1
and a soft X-ray power law SED with minimum energy Emin = 0.1
keV and α = 1.5 (same as Fig. 3).

corresponding case without it,


∆2With MS
Maximum ratio = Max
,
2
∆Without MS

(21)

where the maximum is taken over the wide range of redshifts
from z = 35 to z = 6. We calculate the ratio at k = 0.1
Mpc−1 and show the results in Fig. 4. We find a factor of
2-5 enhancement, with the largest effect being in the case of
late and inefficient star formation but high X-ray production
efficiency. We also verify that the effect is robust with respect
to Vc . For example, for the fixed value of f∗ = 0.03 and fX
= 1 the maximum ratio change from 2.7 to 2.1 when varying
Vc from 16.5 km s−1 to 76.6 km s−1 .
Finally, we note that multiple scattering slightly reduces
the global 21-cm signal. While the total number of Ly-α
photons is conserved, the efficiency of the Ly-α coupling is
changed due to scattering. This is because Ly-α photons are
more concentrated in regions around the sources, and more
of them can be effectively ”wasted” (in terms of their contribution to the WF coupling) in areas where the coupling
is already saturated. On the other hand, in more isolated
regions the number of Ly-α photons is lower and, thus, the
WF coupling is less efficient, which leads to a weaker 21cm signature. For the cases shown in Fig. 3 the maximum
difference in the global signal ranges from ∆T21 = 2.5 mK
(∼ 1.5% of the maximum depth of the signal) for f∗ = 0.5 to
∆T21 = 0.5 mK (∼ 0.5% of maximum depth) for f∗ = 0.001.

4.2

The effect of Ly-α and CMB heating

We now turn to consider the effects of Ly-α and CMB heating on the 21-cm signal for models with no X-ray heating
(Fig. 5). While the effect of Ly-α heating on the global 21-cm
signal was estimated for a few selected astrophysical models (e.g. Ciardi & Salvaterra 2007; Ciardi et al. 2010; Mittal

& Kulkarni 2020), implications for the 21-cm fluctuations
are explored in this paper for the first time. In addition,
with the onset of star formation and buildup of Ly-α background, both Ly-α and CMB heating channels are enabled
and should be taken into account simultaneously. Effects of
both processes on the global 21-cm signal (but not on the
fluctuations) were considered by (Venumadhav et al. 2018);
however, in their calculation of Ly-α heating the authors followed Chen & Miralda-Escudé (2004) thus underestimating
this effect.
Evolution of Ly-α and CMB heating and cooling rates
for a model with f∗ = 0.05, Vc = 16.5 km s−1 and fX = 0 is
shown in the top left panel of Fig. 5, along with the cooling
rate due to the expansion of the Universe for comparison5 .
Fig. 5 also shows the redshift evolution of gas kinetic temperature as well as the global 21-cm signal and the power
spectrum. Additional examples with f∗ = 0.01, Vc = 16.5
km s−1 and f∗ = 0.2, Vc = 50 km s−1 can be found in
Appendix C.
From the figure we see that, despite being sub-dominant
over a wide redshift range, the CMB heating rate does have
an effect on the overall thermal history and the resulting 21cm signal. Even though it is generally weak (and is always
weaker than cooling by Hubble expansion), CMB heating is
stronger than Ly-α heating at redshifts higher than z ∼ 17
(for the model shown in the figure) and contributes a few
degrees to the gas temperature (top right panel of Fig. 5),
which in turn reduces the depth of the global 21-cm signal
by a few tens of mK and suppresses the power spectrum
(bottom panels of Fig. 5).
The effect of Ly-α heating starts to dominate at z ∼ 17,
first over the CMB heating and then over the Hubble expansion term. The leading effect is that of continuum photons
which heat the gas, with the contribution of injected photons becoming important only at low redshifts following the
increase of the kinetic gas temperature. In this specific example, with the Ly-α and CMB heating included, gas temperature reaches the value of 101.2 K by the end of the
simulation (z = 6, the lowest redshift shown); while when
neglecting the two contributions the temperature at z = 6
is only 0.6 K, and when only CMB heating is taken into account it is 3.7 K. Because in the full case (with both Ly-α
and CMB heating included) the temperature is always lower
than the threshold value at which heating by continuum Lyα photons is canceled by cooling due to the injected photons,
Ly-α photons keep heating up the neutral gas even at the
end of reionization.
Additional intuition regarding the redshift range at
which Ly-α heating is significant can be obtained by considering the coupling coefficient (shown with the blue line in the
top right panel of Fig. 5). Comparing the time dependence
of the coupling coefficient to that of the gas temperature in
the model with Ly-α heating, we notice that Ly-α heating
does not have an impact on thermal history for xα  1, i.e.
when the Ly-α background is weak. Efficient Ly-α heating
requires a strong intensity of the Ly-α field and, thus, is ex-

5

Note that in the interest of space we are not showing components such as Compton heating and shock heating due to structure formation which are included in our simulation.
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

The subtlety of Ly-α photons and the 21-cm signal

9

Figure 5. Thermal history (averaged over the simulation box) and the resulting 21-cm signal for an example astrophysical scenario where
heating is dominated by Ly-α photons. We assume fX = 0 (no X-rays), f∗ = 0.05, Vc = 16.5 km s−1 . Top left: Heating/cooling rates of
the neutral IGM (see the legend). Solid lines show mechanisms that heat the IGM (negative dTK /dz) and dashed lines show mechanisms
that cool the IGM (positive dTK /dz). In the interest of space, we do not show the contributions of Compton heating and structure
formation which are included in our simulation. Top right: The gas temperature with and without Ly-α and CMB heating (see the
legend). We also show the evolution of the coupling coefficient (solid blue) to illustrate that Ly-α heating becomes important only after
the coupling nearly saturates. Bottom left: The global 21-cm signal with and without Ly-α and CMB heating (see the legend). Bottom
right: The 21-cm power spectrum at k = 0.1 Mpc−1 with and without Ly-α and CMB heating (see the legend).

pected to affect the low-redshift 21-cm signal while having
a minor effect at high redshifts.
That significant Ly-α heating occurs following a significant delay after the onset of WF coupling was first pointed
out by Furlanetto & Pritchard (2006), where an approximation for the fractional temperature change per Hubble time
from Ly-α heating was derived for small values of xα . Their
result,
Lyα
0.8 10
2
∼ xα 4/3
,
3 H(z)nHI kB TK
1+z
T

(22)

K

valid for the early stages of Ly-α heating, suggests that
Ly-α heating is negligible when xα  1, and the 21-cm
spin temperature deviates from the CMB temperature only
when xα & 1. Our results agree with this conclusion, as can
be seen from Fig. 6 which shows the kinetic temperature
versus the Ly-α coupling coefficient at a fixed redshift of
z = 15 for models with Ly-α plus CMB heating, CMB heating only and a reference case without the two terms. The
results are shown for a large selection of astrophysical scenarios with f∗ varied between 0.001 and 0.5, Vc between 16.5
km s−1 and 76.5 km s−1 , and fX = 0 for all the cases. The
two sets with heating start to diverge from one another at
xα ∼ 10, showing the the effect of Ly-α heating is negligible
at lower xα , but wins over the CMB heating at higher values of the coupling coefficient. An important implication is
that the commonly used limit of fully coupled and adiabatically cooled gas, even though an insigtful approximation,
is, actually, not a valid physical case. This is because strong
Ly-α coupling will inevitably be accompanied by substantial Ly-α and CMB heating which significantly change the
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

Figure 6. The kinetic gas temperature vs. the Ly-α coupling coefficient at z = 15. Each point represents a simulation run with different astrophysical parameters. Simulation runs with both Ly-α
and CMB heating are shown with dark green squares and compared to simulations with only CMB heating (light green circles)
or only Ly-α heating (red triangles). The horizontal line marks
the reference case of an adiabatically cooled gas with no Ly-α
heating and no CMB heating.

thermal state of the gas compared to the adiabatic cooling
limit. With the Ly-α and CMB heating taken into account,
gas temperature in the absence of X-ray heating is modeldependent and varies as a function of f∗ and Vc . We leave
detailed characterization of this limit for future work.
Let us now examine the resulting 21-cm signals in
greater details (bottom panels of Fig. 5). As is evident from
the figure, both Ly-α and CMB heating play important roles
in shaping the absorption trough of the global signal. Because at high redshifts CMB heating rate is higher than
that of Ly-α, it has a stronger effect on the depth of the ab-

10

Reis, Fialkov, and Barkana

sorption feature, while Ly-α heating plays a more important
role in shaping the low-redshift part of the global signal. We
find that in the full case the maximum depth of the absorption feature is only −160.1 mK, i.e. the absorption feature
is ∼ 20% shallower than when the extra heating terms are
not included (−202.4 mK). For comparison, when only CMB
heating is considered, the maximum depth is −167.9 mK and
when only Ly-α heating is considered the maximum depth is
−175.8 mK. In total, with the extra heating terms included,
the absorption feature is shallower, narrower and shifted to
lower redshifts. In addition, a weak emission feature might
be present if the gas is heated above the temperature of the
CMB.
Another important implication of the extra heating
terms is the suppression of the 21-cm power spectrum at low
redshifts where their contribution is significant (at z . 15
in the specific example shown in the bottom right panel of
Fig. 5). Because Ly-α heating by individual sources is generally weak, this component becomes relevant only at low
redshift after a significant population of sources builds up
to produce strong enough Ly-α background (as we discussed
above, xα  1 is required). Therefore, heating by Ly-α photons is relatively smooth (see a detailed discussion on the
intrinsic non-homogeneity of Ly-α contribution to heating
in Appendix B) and its effect on the 21-cm power spectrum
is mostly a direct manifestation of the suppression of the total signal intensity: since the total magnitude of the absorption 21-cm signal is reduced due to the additional heating
by Ly-α and CMB, so is the strength of the power spectrum.
The change in the power spectrum is most strongly
manifested around the redshift of heating transition, zh , defined as the moment when the temperature of the gas is equal
to the radiation temperature. At zh the resulting global 21cm signal vanishes leading to vanishing power in fluctuations. With the extra heating terms included, this milestone
is shifted to earlier cosmic times (higher redshifts) and the
power spectrum at zh is stronger than expected. Specifically
for the scenarios with no X-ray heating that we consider
here, the 21-cm signal is strong in absorption during the
epoch of reionization and is manifested as a prominent peak
in the power spectrum when shown at a fixed comoving scale
and as a function of redshift. Inclusion of either one of the
new heating terms (Ly-α and/or CMB) decreases the contrast between the temperature of the gas and that of the
CMB, shifting the point of heating transition to higher redshifts, which leads to elimination of the low-redshift power
peak.
In total, we find that suppression of the power spectrum
during reionzation, shallower and narrower global absorption trough and emergence of a (weak) emission feature are
generic implications of Ly-α and CMB heating and have important consequences for the 21-cm signals in the observable
redshift range, as further discussed in § 5.
4.3

Ly-α and CMB heating versus X-ray heating

As we mentioned above, Ly-α photons alone can heat the
gas up to a temperature of ∼ 100 K. While efficient X-ray
heating can bring atoms to much higher kinetic temperatures, the actual X-ray production capability of high redshift galaxies is not well constrained and could be very low.
As we have just seen, in such cases Ly-α and CMB heating

are expected to have a strong effect on the predicted 21-cm
signal. In this section we explore the interplay between Xray heating and the joined contribution of Ly-α plus CMB
heating, in order to find values of astrophysical parameters
for which Ly-α and CMB terms should not be ignored.
We start by considering the effect of Ly-α plus CMB
heating on the gas kinetic temperature, the 21-cm global
signal and power spectrum for three different values of the
X-ray production efficiency fX = 0.01, 0.1, 1 and hard SED
of XRBs (Fig. 7). We use the same base model as in Fig.
5 with f∗ = 0.05 and Vc = 16.5 km s−1 . We find that for
low (but non-negligible) values of fX (namely, 0.01 and 0.1),
Ly-α plus CMB heating is the dominant heating mechanism,
and, consequently, the effect of the extra heating terms on
the 21-cm signal is very significant. When including Ly-α
and CMB heating, similarly to what we saw in the case with
fX = 0, with weak X-ray heating the absorption trough of
the global signal becomes narrower, shallower, and with a
minimum at higher redshift, while the low-redshift power
spectrum is strongly suppressed. A minor effect is seen even
in the case of fX = 1, i.e. the most commonly used X-ray
heating efficiency.
Like in the case with no X-ray heating, in the presence
of X-ray sources the change in the power spectrum is most
strongly manifested around the heating transition. For example, in the case with fX = 0.01 and without Ly-α and
CMB heating terms, even though it is warmer than in the
adiabatic cooling limit, the gas is still colder than the CMB
at all the simulated redshifts. However, with the extra heating terms included the point of heating transition is shifted
to higher redshifts (z ∼ 7), and the EoR power spectrum is
strongly suppressed. More generally, in models with weak Xray heating which usually leads to cold reionization (i.e. the
IGM is colder than the CMB during the EoR), extra heating
acts to suppresses 21-cm fluctuations by reducing the contrast between the background temperature and that of the
gas; while in hot EoR scenarios (where the IGM is heated
above the CMB level early on), extra heating will have a
negligible effect as CMB heating is small compared to Xrays while Ly-α heating vanishes owing to the cancellation
of the continuum and injected contributions.
Finally, we explore a grid of models in order to establish
at which values of astrophysical parameters Ly-α and CMB
heating are important relatively to X-ray heating. Since the
magnitude of Ly-α and CMB heating depends on the intensity of the Ly-α flux, this term is mainly regulated by
f∗ and Vc , while X-tray heating also strongly depends on
its normalization, fX . To quantify the effect, we calculate
difference (in mK units) in the intensity of the global absorption feature between simulations with the extra heating
and reference simulations without it. In Fig. 8 we show the
difference versus f∗ and fX for a fixed value of Vc = 16.5 and
X-ray SED of XRBs from Fragos et al. (2013) which peaks
at photon energy of E = 1 keV (most similar to a power law
SED with Emin = 1 keV). The results for a softer powerlaw SED with Emin = 0.1 keV and α = 1.5 and a harder
X-ray SED with Emin = 2 keV and α = 1.5 are qualitatively
similar.
As expected, the importance of Ly-α and CMB heating for the 21-cm signal strongly depends on the value of
fX and (to a lesser extent) on the shape of the X-ray SED.
For high values of fX , X-ray heating is clearly the domiMNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

The subtlety of Ly-α photons and the 21-cm signal

11

Figure 8. Difference (in mK units) in the intensity of the global absorption feature between simulations with Ly-α and CMB heating
and reference simulations without these two effects. The difference
is shown as a function of fX and f∗ for a fixed value of Vc = 16.5
km s−1 and assuming the predicted high-z SED of XRBs.

Figure 7. The effect of Ly-α and CMB heating in models with
various levels of X-ray heating. Top panel: The effect of Ly-α and
CMB heating on the kinetic temperature of the gas for various
values of the X-ray production efficiency (solid lines). A comparison model, where Ly-α and CMB heating are both not present,
is also shown (dashed). Middle panel: The global 21-cm signal for
the same astrophysical cases. Bottom panel: The power spectrum
at k = 0.1 Mpc−1 . In this figure we use the same set of astrophysical parameters as in Fig. 5 (except for varying fX as is indicated
in the legend).

nant process, with the vanishing difference between the full
and the reference cases for all the explored values of f∗ . The
difference increases at lower values of fX (and develops a
dependence on f∗ ), showing that the effects induced by the
Ly-α background become significant. For values of fX below a model-dependent threshold (fX ∼ 5 for XRBs), the
effect of Ly-α and CMB heating on the absorption depth is
larger than 5 mK. The threshold value is lower/higher for
a softer/harder SED as softer X-ray sources are more efficient in heating up the gas (e.g., Fialkov et al. 2014b). We
find that for low fX , Ly-α and CMB heating can produce
an effect of up to ∼ 40 mK (for high f∗ and Vc = 16.5 km
s−1 ).
We also find that for models with weak X-ray heating,
the strength of the effect depends on the star formation rate
(SFR), which is determined by the minimum mass for star
formation (parametrized by Vc ) and the star formation efficiency, f∗ . As expected, the effect of Ly-α and CMB heating is stronger in models with higher f∗ and lower Vc as in
such cases xα grows rapidly with redshfit. For models with
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

lower SFR, coupling does not reach saturation by the time
reionization eliminates the 21-cm signal. In such cases the
absorption depth is relatively small, with or without Ly-α
and CMB heating, and, thus, the absolute difference is small.
Lastly, there is some degree of degeneracy between fX and
f∗ in the strength of the effect, owing to the fact that both
X-ray heating and the intensity of the Ly-α background scale
as f∗ in our model.

5

THE UPDATED LANDSCAPE OF THE 21-CM
SIGNAL

With the updated framework in place, we explore the entire
new landscape of possible 21-cm signals varying the seven
model parameters over broad ranges as indicated in Table 1.
In this section we also take into account Poisson fluctuations
in the number of halos (Reis et al. 2020a) which were not
included in our previous papers. We construct a dataset of
5968 randomly sampled astrophysical scenarios and compare
the ranges of both the global signals and the power spectra to the predictions derived using the previous version of
our code, where, as discussed above, multiple scattering was
taken into account only approximately, while Poisson fluctuations as well as both Ly-α and CMB heating were ignored
(we use datasets containing 29641 global signals and 11164
power spectra corresponding to the simulation setup as in
Cohen et al. 2017, 2018, 2019). While both the new and the
old datasets are representative, the random sampling might
not be optimal and some narrow regions of the parameter
space might remain untested. Hence, this comparison is performed solely for illustration purposes, and we leave a more
thorough exploration of the parameter space (such as needed
in order to derive parameter constraints using observational
upper limits) for future work. The results are shown in Figs.
9 and 10.
We first consider the range of possible global signals

12

Reis, Fialkov, and Barkana

Figure 9. Absorption depth of the global signal versus the central
frequency/redshift (lower/upper x-axis) of the absorption trough.
Each dot represents a model with a unique combination of the
astrophysical parameters f∗ , Vc , fX , Emin , α, Rmfp , and τ (see
Table 1). We compare the results obtained with (in color, for 5968
new astrophysical scenarios) and without (black, 26886 models,
from Cohen et al. 2019) the newly added effects (Ly-α and CMB
heating, multiple scattering and Poisson fluctuations). The points
are colored with respect to the value of the mean star formation
rate density (SFRD) at z = 17.

which are strongly affected by the new heating terms. We
use the entire dataset of 5968 new full-physics models to
explore the distribution of the depth of the absorption feature as a function of the central frequency of the absorption
trough (see Fig. 9) and compare this results to our previous works (Cohen et al. 2017, 2019). We find that, owing
to the contribution of the new heating terms, the absorption trough of a global signal in the newly revised models
reaches a floor of −164.72 mK at redshifts z ≈ 15 − 19. This
is in striking contrast to our previous predictions where the
deepest absorption, obtained in the case of the adiabatically cooling Universe without X-ray heating, is a monotonically decreasing function of cosmic time and is −178.43
mK at z = 19 and −216.08 mK at z = 15, dropping to
even lower values at lower redshifts (e.g. −264.40 mK at
z = 10). Reduced absorption trough is not the only outcome of the additional heating components. With the extra
heating terms, the global 21-cm signals, shown as a function of redshift/frequency on the right panel of Fig. 10, are
more likely to be narrower, slightly shifted to lower frequencies and exhibit a stronger emission feature compared to the
previously considered models.
The deepest absorption of −164.72 mK that we obtain
from the new dataset is ∼ 10% shallower than the signals
demonstrated by Chuzhoy & Shapiro (2006) and Mittal &
Kulkarni (2020). The discrepancy could be explained by several factors. First, these earlier works neglect the effect of
CMB heating which adds extra few degrees to the gas temperature leading to a slightly weaker 21-cm signal (e.g. see
Fig. 5). Second, we find that the maximum absorption depth
of the 21-cm signal is sensitive to small, O(1) K, variations
in the gas kinetic temperature. For this reason, the initial
conditions used to calculate the gas temperature play an im-

portant role. Mittal & Kulkarni (2020) mention that their
initial conditions, taken from RECFAST (Seager et al. 1999),
give TK = 18 k at z = 30. We, on the other hand, use
HyRec (Ali-Haı̈moud & Hirata 2011) and assume cosmological parameters from Planck to create a non-uniform initial
temperature cube biased by large scale density fluctuations,
which in average gives TK = 19.86 K at z = 30. Finally, we
compute the global 21-cm signal as a mean over a large cosmological volume, while in the other works only an averaged
calculation was done.
The updated range of possible 21-cm power spectra is
shown on the left panel of Fig. 10. Compared to our old
models, here we see a (model and scale dependent) enhancement by a factor of ∼ 2 − 5 at high redshifts owing to the
effects of multiple scattering and Poisson fluctuations, and
a suppression at low redshift (with peak power lower by a
factor of 6.62 at z = 9 and k = 0.1 Mpc−1 ) due to the
additional heating terms. While the high-redshift enhancement should make it easier to detect the signal with the
future SKA, NenuFAR and HERA at low-frequencies, the
reduced range of power spectra at the EoR redshifts is of
a particular importance for the ongoing experiments, such
as MWA (Trott et al. 2020), LOFAR (Mertens et al. 2020),
and HERA. Ignoring the effects of the Ly-α and CMB heating on the predicted low-redshift 21-cm power spectra will
result in underestimating the total energy injection into the
IGM, overestimating the intensity of the resulting signals,
and, consequently, biasing high the estimates of the heating
efficiency of X-ray sources when fitting models to data.

6

SUMMARY

In this work we have presented revised predictions for the
21-cm signal that take into account three subtle astrophysical effects induced by the Ly-α radiative background: Ly-α
heating, CMB heating, and the multiple scattering of Ly-α
photons. The impact of all these effects on the power spectrum of the 21-cm signal is considered here for the first time,
while the effects of Ly-α heating and CMB heating on the
global 21-cm signal have been previously calculated for a
handful of high-redshift astrophysical scenarios. In this work
we created a large dataset of models, varying the astrophysical parameters in order to cover a broad range of plausible
values, and we explored the impact of these processes on the
21-cm signal.
We have found that both Ly-α and CMB heating of the
IGM have an important effect once the WF coupling due
to Ly-α photons begins to saturate. CMB heating becomes
significant first (when xα ∼ 5 − 10), and Ly-α heating overtakes it after a delay (when xα ∼ 50 − 100). Both effects are
particularly important for astrophysical scenarios with inefficient X-ray heating (typically with fX . 0.1 for an SED
of X-ray binaries). With the formation of the first population of stars and build up of the Ly-α background, these
processes heat the cold hydrogen gas, eventually raising its
temperature even in the absence of other heating mechanisms. Because these processes inevitably take place as a result of star formation, which also enables the WF coupling
that is necessary for a strong 21-cm signal, the popular limiting case of an adiabatically cold IGM with saturated WF
coupling is not a realistic bound to consider when comparing
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

The subtlety of Ly-α photons and the 21-cm signal

13

Figure 10. The updated range of possible 21-cm signals (both the global signal and the power spectrum) in standard astrophysical models.
Left: Variety of the possible 21-cm power spectra at k = 0.1 Mpc−1 . Blue lines show the results from this work, including the effects of
Ly-α heating, CMB heating, multiple scattering and Poisson fluctuations. Black lines show the results from our previous work (Cohen
et al. 2018, 2019), where these effects were not included. In each case 2000 randomly selected models are shown (thin lines) as well as
the envelope showing the upper limit at each redshift (thick lines) derived from the entire datasets which cover the parameter ranges
listed in Table 1 (5968 new models, and 29641/11164 old global signals/power spectra). The red and orange triangle markers show upper
limits from LOFAR (Mertens et al. 2020) and MWA (Trott et al. 2020), respectively. Right: Possible 21-cm global signals. Same color
coding as for the models on the left. Black lines show the results from our previous work (Cohen et al. 2017, 2019). Here the envelopes
are lower limits (i.e., indicating the strongest possible absorption at each redshift).

models to data. Since the deepest absorption troughs in the
global 21-cm spectra and the strongest reionization power
spectra are obtained for the coldest possible IGM, Ly-α and
CMB heating significantly change predictions for those signals that are the easiest ones to rule out observationally.
With the newly included effects our models reach an absorption floor at z ∼ 15 − 19 with a maximum absorption
depth of −165 mK (considering here standard astrophysical models, without an excess radio background or cooling
by millicharged dark matter), in striking contrast with predictions for an adiabatically expanding Universe where the
absorption troughs are deeper at lower redshifts (e.g., -264
mK at z = 10, Cohen et al. 2016). Owing to the lower intensity of the 21-cm signals, the 21-cm power spectra are
also reduced at low redshifts, with peak power lower by a
factor of 6.6 at z = 9 and k = 0.1 Mpc−1 . This suppression
places standard astrophysical models further out of reach of
ongoing experiments (e.g., Trott et al. 2020; Mertens et al.
2020).
In contrast with the extra heating terms which suppress the signal, the multiple scattering of Ly-α photons
enhances the power spectrum by a scale-dependent factor of
∼ 2 − 5 and renders the cosmic dawn 21-cm signal easier to
observe with radio telescopes such as the SKA, NenuFAR
and HERA. This effect peaks at the onset of star formation during the coupling transition; however, we find that it
can also be significant at lower redshifts in cases with weak
X-ray heating.
We conclude that, although created by subtle physical
processes, the newly-included effects of the Ly-α background
on the 21-cm signal are important. The landscape of possible 21-cm signals is strongly modified when these effects
are included, which should be taken into account for a reliable estimation of high-redshift astrophysical parameters
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

from observations of both 21-cm power spectra and global
signals.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the usage of the DiRAC HPC. AF was supported by the Royal Society University Research Fellowship.
This research was supported for I.R. and R.B. by the Israel
Science Foundation (grant No. 2359/20) and by the ISFNSFC joint research program (grant No. 2580/17). We thank
Shikhar Mittal and Girish Kulkarni for useful comments.

DATA AVAILABILITY
No new data were generated or analysed in support of this
research.

REFERENCES
Ali-Haı̈moud Y., Hirata C. M., 2011, Phys. Rev. D, 83, 043513
Allison A. C., Dalgarno A., 1969, ApJ, 158, 423
Baek S., Di Matteo P., Semelin B., Combes F., Revaz Y., 2009,
A&A, 495, 389
Barkana R., 2018, The Encyclopedia of Cosmology. Volume 1:
Galaxy Formation and Evolution Rennan Barkana Tel Aviv
University, doi:10.1142/9496-vol1.
Barkana R., Loeb A., 2004, ApJ, 609, 474
Barkana R., Loeb A., 2005, The Astrophysical Journal, 626, 1
Bowman J. D., Rogers A. E. E., Monsalve R. A., Mozdzen T. J.,
Mahesh N., 2018, Nature, 555, 67
Chen X., Miralda-Escudé J., 2004, ApJ, 602, 1
Chuzhoy L., Shapiro P. R., 2006, ApJ, 651, 1
Chuzhoy L., Shapiro P. R., 2007, ApJ, 655, 843

14

Reis, Fialkov, and Barkana

Ciardi B., Salvaterra R., 2007, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc., 381,
1137
Ciardi B., Salvaterra R., Di Matteo T., 2010, MNRAS, 401, 2635
Cohen A., Fialkov A., Barkana R., 2016, MNRAS, 459, L90
Cohen A., Fialkov A., Barkana R., Lotem M., 2017, MNRAS, 472,
1915
Cohen A., Fialkov A., Barkana R., 2018, MNRAS, 478, 2193
Cohen A., Fialkov A., Barkana R., Monsalve R., 2019, arXiv eprints, p. arXiv:1910.06274
DeBoer D. R., et al., 2017, PASP, 129, 045001
Ewall-Wice A., Chang T. C., Lazio J., Doré O., Seiffert M., Monsalve R. A., 2018, ApJ, 868, 63
Feng C., Holder G., 2018, ApJ, 858, L17
Fialkov A., Barkana R., 2014, MNRAS, 445, 213
Fialkov A., Barkana R., 2019, MNRAS, 486, 1763
Fialkov A., Barkana R., Tseliakhovich D., Hirata C. M., 2012,
MNRAS, 424, 1335
Fialkov A., Barkana R., Visbal E., Tseliakhovich D., Hirata C. M.,
2013, MNRAS, 432, 2909
Fialkov A., Barkana R., Pinhas A., Visbal E., 2014a, MNRAS,
437, L36
Fialkov A., Barkana R., Visbal E., 2014b, Nature, 506, 197
Field G. B., 1958, Proceedings of the IRE, 46, 240
Fragos T., et al., 2013, ApJ, 764, 41
Furlanetto S. R., Pritchard J. R., 2006, MNRAS, 372, 1093
Furlanetto S. R., Zaldarriaga M., Hernquist L., 2004, ApJ, 613,
16
Ghara R., Mellema G., 2019, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1904.09999
Grachev S. I., 1989, Astrofizika, 30, 347
Greig B., Mesinger A., 2015, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 449, 4246
Haiman Z., Rees M. J., Loeb A., 1997, ApJ, 476, 458
Hirata C. M., 2006, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 367, 259
Koopmans L., et al., 2015, in Advancing Astrophysics
with the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14). p. 1
(arXiv:1505.07568)
Loeb A., Rybicki G. B., 1999, ApJ, 524, 527
Madau P., Meiksin A., Rees M. J., 1997, ApJ, 475, 429
Meiksin A., Madau P., 2020, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2006.15108
Mertens F. G., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 493, 1662
Mesinger A., 2019, The Cosmic 21-cm Revolution; Charting
the first billion years of our universe, doi:10.1088/25143433/ab4a73.
Mesinger A., Furlanetto S., Cen R., 2011, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 411, 955
Mineo S., Gilfanov M., Sunyaev R., 2012, MNRAS, 419, 2095
Mittal S., Kulkarni G., 2020, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2009.10746
Molaro M., Davé R., Hassan S., Santos M. G., Finlator K., 2019,
MNRAS, p. 2127
Naoz S., Barkana R., 2008, MNRAS, 385, L63
Pacucci F., Mesinger A., Mineo S., Ferrara A., 2014, MNRAS,
443, 678
Planck Collaboration et al., 2014, A&A, 571, A16
Planck Collaboration et al., 2018, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:1807.06209
Press W. H., Schechter P., 1974, ApJ, 187, 425
Price D. C., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 478, 4193
Pritchard J. R., Furlanetto S. R., 2006, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 367, 1057
Rees M. J., 1986, MNRAS, 222, 27P
Reis I., Barkana R., Fialkov A., 2020a, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2008.04914
Reis I., Fialkov A., Barkana R., 2020b, MNRAS, 499, 5993
Santos M. G., Ferramacho L., Silva M. B., Amblard A., Cooray
A., 2010, MNRAS, 406, 2421
Seager S., Sasselov D. D., Scott D., 1999, ApJ, 523, L1
Semelin B., Combes F., Baek S., 2007, A&A, 474, 365

Sheth R. K., Tormen G., 1999, MNRAS, 308, 119
Singh S., et al., 2018, ApJ, 858, 54
Sobacchi E., Mesinger A., 2013, MNRAS, 432, 3340
Trott C. M., et al., 2020, MNRAS,
Tseliakhovich D., Hirata C., 2010, Phys. Rev. D, 82, 083520
Venumadhav T., Dai L., Kaurov A., Zaldarriaga M., 2018, Phys.
Rev. D, 98, 103513
Visbal E., McQuinn M., 2018, ApJ, 863, L6
Visbal E., Barkana R., Fialkov A., Tseliakhovich D., Hirata C. M.,
2012, Nature, 487, 70
Weinberger L. H., Haehnelt M. G., Kulkarni G., 2019, MNRAS,
485, 1350
Wouthuysen S. A., 1952, AJ, 57, 31
Zarka P., Girard J. N., Tagger M., Denis L., 2012, in Boissier
S., de Laverny P., Nardetto N., Samadi R., Valls-Gabaud D.,
Wozniak H., eds, SF2A-2012: Proceedings of the Annual meeting of the French Society of Astronomy and Astrophysics. pp
687–694
Zygelman B., 2005, ApJ, 622, 1356

APPENDIX A: MONTE CARLO PROCEDURE
In the Monte Carlo procedure each photon (emitted at a
given frequency νem and a given redshift zem ) moves in
straight lines between scattering events. The distance travelled between two scattering events and the angle of scattering are both random variables. We perform the MC calculation only for photons that are emitted between Ly-α
and Ly-β. For higher frequency photons multiple scattering is less important since these photons travel significantly
shorter distances in the first place.
At each step we have the current redshift, frequency,
1+zi
νem , and
and radial distance from the source: zi , νi = 1+z
em
Ri . To find the redshift of the next scattering event we calculate the optical depth τ (z) for z < zi (Loeb & Rybicki
1999):
τ (z) =

ν∗ (zem )
να



νem
να

3/2  



νi
νi 1 + z
F
−1 −F
−1 ,
να
να 1 + zi
(A1)

where
Z
F (y) =

dy

(y + 1)−5/2
=
y2
√
5y 2 + 20
y+1
5
1+y+1
3
−
log √
,
2
y(y + 1)3/2
1+y−1

(A2)

−1/2

and ν∗ (z) = 5.58 × 1012 Ωb hΩm (1 + z)3/2 Hz is the frequency at which the optical depth is equal to one for a photon emitted at z. Note that τ (z) diverges as νi approaches
να . We then randomly draw a value for the optical depth at
which the photon was absorbed from an exp (−τ ) distribution, and find the redshift at which this value matches τ (z)
from Eqn. A1, this redshift will be zi+1 .
The comoving distance the photon travelled in this step
is then

p
6.0 p
Li = 1/2
a(zi+1 ) − a(zi ) Gpc.
(A3)
Ωm h
Where a = 1/(1 + z). To calculate Ri+1 (the radial
distance from the source in the next step) we draw (from a
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

The subtlety of Ly-α photons and the 21-cm signal
uniform distribution) the direction in which the photon travelled. In comoving coordinates we use Euclidean geometry,
so
q
Ri+1 = Ri2 + L2i + 2Ri Li µ,
(A4)
where µ = cos θ, θ being the angle with respect to the radial
direction from the source.
This is repeated until the frequency of the photon is
very close to να . Here the number of scattering is very large
and we use an analytic diffusion approximation from Loeb
& Rybicki (1999) to finish the path of the photon with one
final step. Numerically this happens when vi < νmin , where
νmin = να + 0.01ν∗ (zem ). We have checked the convergence
of our results with respect to the choice of νmin .
For this step we define the scaled variables
ν − να
ν̃ =
,
(A5)
ν∗ (zabs )
and
L̃ =

L
,
R∗ (zabs )

(A6)

where
R∗ (z) = 6.77

Ωb
(1 + z)Mpc
Ωm

(A7)

is the distance at which ν∗ (z) is redshifted to να .
According to the approximation from Loeb & Rybicki (1999), L̃ could be generated by drawing L̃x , L̃y , L̃z
from a Gaussian distribution
with mean zero and variance
q
2ν̃/(9a2abs ), and L̃ = L̃2x + L̃2y + L̃2z . We then calculate L
for this step, draw a random direction, and obtain the final
R with Eqn. A4. Note that since the scattering is elastic,
the frequency of the photon changes only due to redshift, so
the emission redshift and frequency defines the absorption
redshift zabs .
This procedure is repeated for many photons, on grids
of emission redshifts zem , and frequencies νem . To get
fscatter (zabs , zem , r) (as used in Eqn. 13) we take all the
photons with given zabs and zem and find the fraction of
them that travelled a distance r. Numerically, for a given
zem (from the MC calculation grid), and a given z̃abs used
in the 21cm simulation itself, we take all photons that were
absorbed between z̃abs +0.025 and z̃abs −0.025, and bin them
on a grid of distances. We have checked the convergence of
our results with respect to the redshift bins. For each bin
we interpolate the fraction of photons between the different
zem to the simulation value z̃em .
We fit the following (purely phenomenological) function
to the distance distribution n(r) in logarithmic bins:

2




dn
r
1


log
= γ log
×

−β/2  +
dlog(r)
rmin
r
1 + rmid

−2α2
r
A×
(A8)
rmid e−β
for rmin < r < rSL , and


dn
log
=1
dlog(r)

The first term represents a power law dn/dr ∼ r(γ−1) ,
where the −1 comes from the logarithmic bins. Note that the
number of photons in a simulation cell goes like r(γ−3) as the
photons are distributed over spherical shells with V ∼ r2 .
The rmin parameter is used only in the fitting procedure and
does not represent an actual minimum distance (it represents the minimum distance that will receive a photon given
the number of iterations of the MC code). The power law
for dn/dr is thus extrapolated to smaller distances. The second term is a cutoff at distance rmid with log-space width
∼ β. The last term is accounting for accumulation of photons
close to the maximum distance (which is located roughly at
the start of the drop, i.e, at rmid × e−β ). The choice of function is phenomenological and was found to provide a good fit
to the distance distribution over the entire range of emission
and absorption redshifts (z = 6 − 40 in our simulation).
fscatter (zabs , zem , r), used in Eqn. 13, is equal to
Rdn/dr extrapolated to r < rmin and normalized so that
drfscatter (zabs , zem , r) = 1. We have shown example results
of this procedure in Reis et al. (2020a).
Computationally, fscatter (zabs , zem , r) serves to calculate
the new window functions in real space
fscatter (zabs , zem , r)
,
(A10)
4πr2
which we use in the simulation instead of the spherical shell
6
window functions
. Note that these window functions are
R
normalized, drW = 1. The second integral in Eqn. 13 can
then be calculated by convolving the window function with
the emissivity:
Z
drfscatter (zabs , zem , r)(νn0 (zabs , zem ), zem )r,x =
Z
fscatter (zabs , zem , r)
dr
(νn0 (zabs , zem ), zem , x + r) =
4πr2
Z
drW (zabs , zem , r)(νn0 (zabs , zem ), zem , x + r) =

W (zabs , zem , r) =

W (zabs , zem ) ~ (νn0 (zabs , zem ), zem ).

(A11)

APPENDIX B: INHOMOGENEITY OF Ly-α HEATING
AND ITS EFFECT ON THE FLUCTUATIONS OF THE
21-CM SIGNAL
The Ly-α contribution to heating is expected to be smooth,
as for this component to have a significant effect on the
21-cm signal, strong Ly-α background created by multiple
sources is required. Here we test this hypothesis by isolating
the effect of Ly-α heating and comparing our full simulation
to a test case where Ly-α heating is set to be spatially homogeneous. The test case is constructed so that the Ly-α
contribution to the heating rate, Lyα (Eqn. 7), is spatially
uniform with the same mean value as in the original simulation. Examples of 21-cm images with the smooth and the
non-uniform Ly-α heating rates are shown in Fig. B1. In
both cases the simulation parameters are Vc = 16.5 km s−1 ,
f∗ = 0.2507, fX = 0.001 (so that Ly-α heating is the dominant heating mechanism), and ζ = 30. The images are shown

(A9)

otherwise. rSL is the straight line distance, and rmin , rmid , γ,
β, α, and A are free parameters.
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

15

6

For comparison, for spherical shell window functions,
W (zabs , zem ) is non zero only at a single value of r given by
Eqn. 11.

16

Reis, Fialkov, and Barkana
distances relative to injected photons7 also reduces the heating rate near the sources (that is, in high density regions)
compared to far away from the sources (in low density regions).
Finally, the effect of Ly-α heating fluctuations can also
be seen in the 21-cm power spectrum (bottom panel of Fig.
B1), which is enhanced on all scales probed by our simulation by a factor of ∼ 2 at z = 13 for this specific choice
of astrophysical parameters. Fig. B1 also show a case without multiple scattering of Ly-α photons. This examples illustrates that when Ly-α heating is the dominant heating
mechanism, multiple scattering affects 21-cm fluctuations
during the heating transition as well, and not only in the
high-redshift regime.

APPENDIX C: CMB AND Ly-α HEATING EXAMPLES

Figure B1. The effect of Ly-α heating on the 21-cm fluctuations
for an example model with Vc = 16.5 km s−1 , f∗ = 0.251 and
fX = 0.001 (the blue curve in the top panel of Fig. 3). Top: a
slice of the 21-cm brightness temperature at z = 13 for the full
case (left) and the case with an artificially uniform Ly-α heating
rate (right). The color bar shows the values of the brightness
temperature in mK. Note that the regions with zero brightness
temperature are ionized (these are the highest density regions).
Bottom: The corresponding power spectra at z = 15 for the full
case (dark green) and the case with a uniform Ly-α heating rate
(light green). We also show a case without the multiple scattering
of Ly-α photons (dark blue).

at z = 15, which is the epoch at which heating fluctuations
dominate.
As can be seen from the figure, Ly-α heating is intrinsically non-uniform and enhances fluctuations in the 21-cm
signal. In the figure the regions with low brightness temperature are relatively high density regions (the highest density
regions are already ionized). Due to the fluctuations in the
Ly-α heating rate, these regions have lower kinetic temperature and thus a lower brightness temperature (compared to
the test case with a uniform Ly-α heating rate). To understand this result it is important to realize that Ly-α heating
is stronger in low density regions. This can be non-intuitive,
since radiation sources are localized in high density regions
contributing to a larger number of Ly-α photons in these regions. However, Ly-α heating depends on the ratio between
the number of Ly-α photons and the number of baryons.
This dependence on the number of baryons reduces the effect of Ly-α heating in high density regions compared to the
low density regions. In addition, as discussed above, Ly-α
heating is determined by the competition between continuum photons which heat the gas and injected photons which
cool the gas. The fact that continuum photons travel larger

In Fig. C1 and Fig. C2 we show the same quantities as in
Fig. 5 for two additional astrophysical models. In Fig. C1 we
show a case with high circular velocity (corresponding to a
high minimum mass for star formation), and in Fig. C2 we
show a case with low star formation efficiency. In both cases,
as in the case shown in the main text, we see a significant
suppression of the global signal and the EoR power spectrum
due to Ly-α and CMB heating.
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by
the author.

7

This effect is included in the pre-calculated coefficients (the
same place where the spectrum of the sources comes into play).
For each absorption redshift we calculate the maximum emission
redshift (or horizon) for each Lyman resonance. For Ly-α the
horizon is the largest, and becomes smaller for Ly-β, Ly-γ etc.
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

The subtlety of Ly-α photons and the 21-cm signal

Figure C1. Same as Fig. 5 but for an astrophysical scenario with fX = 0 (no X-rays) , f∗ = 0.2, and Vc = 50 km s−1 .

Figure C2. Same as Fig. 5 but for an astrophysical scenario with fX = 0 (no X-rays) , f∗ = 0.01, and Vc = 16.5 km s−1 .

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)

17

