Draft version June 7, 2022
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX62

Inferring the Thermal History of the Intergalactic Medium from the Properties of the Hydrogen and Helium
Lyman-α Forest
Bruno Villasenor,1 Brant Robertson,1 Piero Madau,1 and Evan Schneider2
1 Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of California, Santa Cruz, 1156 High Street, Santa Cruz, CA 95064 USA
2 Department of Physics and Astronomy & Pittsburgh Particle Physics, Astrophysics, and Cosmology Center (PITT PACC), University of

arXiv:2111.00019v3 [astro-ph.CO] 5 Jun 2022

Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA

ABSTRACT
The filamentary network of intergalactic medium (IGM) gas that gives origin to the Lyman-α forest
in the spectra of distant quasars encodes information on the physics of structure formation and the
early thermodynamics of diffuse baryonic material. Here, we use a massive suite of more than 400 highresolution cosmological hydrodynamical simulations run with the Graphics Processing Unit-accelerated
code Cholla to study the IGM at high spatial resolution maintained over the entire computational
volume. The simulations capture a wide range of possible IGM thermal histories by varying the
photoheating and photoionizing background produced by star-forming galaxies and active galactic
nuclei. A statistical comparison of synthetic spectra with the observed 1D flux power spectra of
hydrogen at redshifts 2.2 ≤ z ≤ 5.0 and with the helium Lyman-α opacity at redshifts 2.4 < z <
2.9 tightly constrains the photoionization and photoheating history of the IGM. By leveraging the
constraining power of the available Lyman-α forest data to break model degeneracies, we find that
the IGM experienced two main reheating events over 1.2 Gyr of cosmic time. For our best-fit model,
hydrogen reionization completes by zR ≈ 6.0 with a first IGM temperature peak T0 ' 1.3 × 104 K, and
is followed by the reionization of He II that completes by zR ≈ 3.0 and yields a second temperature
peak of T0 ' 1.4 × 104 K. We discuss how our results can be used to obtain information on the timing
and the sources of hydrogen and helium reionization.
Keywords: hydrodynamical simulations (767) – large-scale structure of the universe (902) – Lyman-α
forest (980) – computational methods (1965)
1. INTRODUCTION

The neutral hydrogen and singly-ionized helium components of gas near the cosmic mean density trace the
distribution of matter in between galaxies and produce
a “forest” of detectable Lyman-α absorption features
in the spectra of distant quasars (e.g., Hernquist et al.
1996; Croft et al. 1998; Meiksin 2009; Slosar et al. 2011;
McQuinn 2016; Worseck et al. 2019). The depth, shape,
and location of absorption lines in the Lyman-α forest
depend on the ionization degree and thermal state of
this intergalactic medium (IGM), which are controlled
by the uncertain UV radiation background produced by
star-forming galaxies and active galactic nuclei (AGNs)
(e.g., Haardt & Madau 2012; Robertson et al. 2015;
Madau & Haardt 2015; Faucher-Giguère 2020), and on
Corresponding author: Bruno Villasenor.
brvillas@ucsc.edu

its density and peculiar velocity fields shaped by gravity
(Cen et al. 1994). Dark matter provides the backbone
of large-scale structure in the Universe, a web-like pattern present in embryonic form in the overdensity motif
of the initial fluctuation field and sharpened by nonlinear gravitational dynamics (Bond et al. 1996). The
Lyman-α forest traces this underlying “cosmic web” on
scales and at redshifts that cannot be probed by any
other observable. Because of its long cooling time, lowdensity gas at z ∼ 2–5 that traces the underlying matter
distribution retains some memory of when and how it
was reheated and reionized at z & 6 (Miralda-Escudé &
Rees 1994). The physics that governs the properties of
the IGM throughout these epochs remain similar, as the
evolving cosmic UV emissivity and the transfer of that
radiation through a medium made clumpy by gravity
determine both the details of the reionization process
and the thermodynamics of the forest.

2

Villasenor et al.

Understanding how reionization occurred, the nature
of the early sources that drove it, the thermal history
and fine-grained properties of hydrogen gas in the cosmic web, and how to extract crucial information on the
cosmological model from observations of Lyman-α absorption are among the most important open questions
in cosmology and key science drivers for numerous major new instruments and facilities. The promise of the
Lyman-α forest for constraining cosmological physics including the nature of dark matter and dark energy has
motivated in part the construction of the Dark Energy
Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI Collaboration et al.
2016), which measures absorption line spectra backlit
by nearly a million quasars at z > 2, and the WEAVE
survey (Pieri et al. 2016) which will observe more than
400,000 high-redshift quasars at z > 2. Interpreting
such observations requires detailed cosmological hydrodynamical simulations that cover an extensive range
of uncertain photoionization and photoheating histories
and consistently maintain high resolution throughout a
statistically representative sub-volume of the Universe.
This paper extends research efforts directly focused
on advancing the state-of-the-art in modeling the IGM
physical structure in cosmological simulations while still
achieving high computational efficiency, thereby providing higher fidelity physical models for interpreting
Lyman-α forest data. In Villasenor et al. (2021) we
introduced the Cholla IGM Photoheating Simulations
(CHIPS) to investigate how different photoheating histories and cosmological parameters impact the structure
of the forest. Here, we use a massive suite of more than
400 CHIPS simulations to study the IGM at a resolution
of 49h−1 ckpc maintained over (50h−1 cMpc)3 volumes.
Performed with the GPU-native MPI-parallelized code
Cholla (Schneider & Robertson 2015), these simulations
span different amplitudes and peak redshifts of the H I
and He II photoionization and photoheating rates.
To anticipate the results of our likelihood analysis constrained by the 1D flux power spectra P (k) measured in
eBOSS, Keck, and VLT data and the observed He II
Lyman-α forest, we find that scenarios where hydrogen
in the cosmic web was fully reionized by star-forming
galaxies by redshift zR ≈ 6.0 and the double reionization of helium was completed by quasar sources about
1.2 billion years later are strongly favored by the data.
Models that reionize hydrogen or helium at earlier or
later cosmic times produce too much or too little cold
gas, and appear to be inconsistent with the observed
P (k) and He II Lyman-α opacity. Our approach differs
from previous work in this field in the following aspects:
1. The simulation grid captures a wide range of possible thermal histories via a four-parameter scal-

ing of the amplitude and timing of the (spatially
uniform) metagalactic UVB responsible for determining the ionization states and temperatures of
the IGM (cf. Nasir et al. 2016; Oñorbe et al.
2017). We use the physically-motivated model of
Puchwein et al. (2019) as a template, and vary
the strength and redshift-timing of their ionization
and heating rates.
2. We do not modify, in post-processing, the mean
transmitted flux hF i in the forest by recalibrating
the Lyman-α optical depth, nor do we assume or
rescale an instantaneous gas temperature-density
relation (cf. Viel et al. 2013a; Iršič et al. 2017a;
Boera et al. 2019; Walther et al. 2021). Indeed,
we find from our simulations that the often assumed perfect power-law relationship between the
temperature and density of the IGM does not provide a good approximation over the relevant density and redshift intervals.
3. Our likelihood analysis evaluates the performance
of a given model in matching the observations over
the complete self-consistently evolved reionization
and thermal history of the IGM, i.e. over the full
redshift range 2.2 ≤ z ≤ 5.0 for the observed 1D
flux power spectrum of hydrogen and over the redshift range 2.4 < z < 2.9 for the Lyman-α opacity
of He II. Since the properties of the gas at one redshift cannot be disentangled from its properties
at previous epochs and the thermal and ionization structure of the IGM evolve with cosmic time
along continuous trajectories, the marginalization
over the parameter posterior distributions should
not be performed independently at each redshift
(cf. Bolton et al. 2014; Nasir et al. 2016; Hiss
et al. 2018; Boera et al. 2019; Walther et al. 2019;
Gaikwad et al. 2020a).
This paper aims to find the optimal photoionization
and photoheating rates that reproduce the observed
properties of the hydrogen and helium Lyman-α forest. In Section 2 we describe the simulations used for
this work, how we apply transformations to the UV
background (UVB) model from Puchwein et al. 2019 to
generate our range of photoionization and photoheating rates, and the impact of the different UVB models
on the statistics of the forest and the properties of the
IGM. We follow by presenting the observational data
and the methodology for the Bayesian Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) inference used to constrain the
model. Section 3 presents our result for the best-fit
model and the comparison of the resulting properties of

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest
the forest and the thermal evolution of the IGM to the
observational determinations and previous inferences.
We summarize our results and conclusions in §4. In Appendix A we discuss resolution effects on the Lyman-α
power spectrum P (k) from our simulations. A quantitative study of the impact on P (k) from rescaling the
effective optical of the skewer sample is presented in Appendix B. In Appendix C we show the variation in the
covariance matrix of the Lyman-α power spectrum from
our simulations. We discuss in Appendix D how possible alterations to our model can modify the predicted
temperature history of the IGM. Finally, Appendix E
analyzes the accuracy of assuming a power-law relation
for the density-temperature distribution of the gas in
our simulations.
2. METHODOLOGY

For the study presented here, we compare the observed statistics of the Lyman-α forest to simulations
that apply different models for the metagalactic UVB.
In this section we briefly describe our simulation code
and the method to extract Lyman-α spectra from the
simulations. We then describe our simulation grid and
the effects that the different UVB models have on the
properties of the IGM. Finally we present the observational measurements and the inference method used to
constrain our model for the UVB photoionization and
photoheating rates.
2.1. Simulations
The simulations used for this work were run with the
cosmological hydrodynamics code Cholla (Schneider &
Robertson 2015; Villasenor et al. 2021). Cholla evolves
the equations of hydrodynamics on a uniform Cartesian
grid using a finite volume approach with a second-order
Godunov scheme (Colella & Woodward 1984). The simulations track the ionization states of hydrogen and helium given by the photoionization from the UVB, recombination with free electrons and collisional ionization. The non-equilibrium H+He chemical network is
evolved simultaneously with the hydrodynamics using
the GRACKLE library (Smith et al. 2017). We assume
a spatially uniform, time-dependent UVB in the form of
redshift-dependent photoionization rates per ion Γ and
photoheating rates per ion H for neutral hydrogen H I,
neutral helium He I, and singly ionized helium He II.
For a detailed description of the simulation code we refer the reader to the methodology section presented in
Villasenor et al. (2021).
The initial conditions for our simulations were generated using the MUSIC code (Hahn & Abel 2011) for a
flat ΛCDM cosmology with parameters H0 = 67.66 km

3

s−1 , Ωm = 0.3111, ΩΛ = 0.6889, Ωb = 0.0497, σ8 =
0.8102, and ns = 0.9665, consistent with the constraints
from Planck Collaboration et al. (2020). In future work,
we plan to extend our analysis and include variation of
the cosmological parameters (Bird et al. 2019; Ho et al.
2022). Unless otherwise stated the volume and numerical size of our simulations correspond to L = 50 h−1 Mpc
and N = 2×10243 cells and particles. The initial conditions for all runs were generated from identical random
number seeds to preserve the same amplitude and phase
for all initial Fourier modes across the simulation suite.
2.2. Synthetic Lyman-α Spectra
The Lyman-α forest sensitively probes the state of the
baryons in the IGM, and absorption lines from the forest
reflect the H I content and the temperature of the gas in
the medium. To compare the properties of the IGM in
our simulations directly to observations, we extract synthetic hydrogen Lyman-α forest spectra from the simulated boxes by measuring the H I density, temperature,
and peculiar velocity of the gas along 12,228 skewers
through the simulation volume, using 4096 skewers along
each axis of the box. The optical depth τ as a function
of velocity u along each skewer is computed by integrating the product of the Lyman-α scattering cross section
and the number density of neutral hydrogen along the
line of sight as described in Villasenor et al. (2021).
The transmitted flux F is computed from the optical
depth τ along the skewers according to F = exp(−τ ).
The power spectrum of the transmitted flux P (k) is calculated as the average amplitude of the one-dimensional
Fourier transform of the flux fluctuations δF (u),
δF (u) ≡

F (u) − hF i
,
hF i

(1)

where hF i is the average transmitted flux over the
skewer sample at a given redshift (see §5.4 from Villasenor et al. 2021 for a detailed description). Similarly,
we extract the flux FHeII transmitted through the He II
Lyman-α forest from the simulations, and compute the
He II effective optical depth as τeff,HeII = − ln hFHeII i.
Figure 1 (top) shows the gas density distribution
at redshift z = 2 from a section taken from one of
our highest-resolution (L=50 h−1 Mpc, N = 2×20483
cells and particles) simulations, where several skewers
crossing the simulated box are shown as yellow lines.
The bottom panels show the gas density surrounding
a selected line of sight and the transmitted hydrogen
Lyman-α flux along the skewer. The absorption lines
in the forest probe the H I column density, the peculiar
velocity, and the temperature of the gas along the line
of sight.

4

Villasenor et al.

Figure 1. Large-scale distribution of gas density (top) from one of our highest-resolution cosmological simulations (L=50
h−1 Mpc, N =2×20483 cells and particles) at redshift z=2 and a set of skewers crossing the simulated box (yellow lines). The
bottom panels show the density of the gas surrounding a selected line of sight and the Lyman-α transmitted flux along the
skewer. Absorption lines in the forest probe the H I column density, the peculiar velocity, and the temperature of the gas along
the line of sight.

2.3. Photoionization and Photoheating Rates
The ionization and thermal evolution of the IGM is
primarily determined by the radiation emitted by starforming galaxies and AGNs over cosmic history (McQuinn 2016; Upton Sanderbeck et al. 2016; Oñorbe
et al. 2017). The photoionization and photoheating
rates adopted in our simulations are computed from
the intensity of the background radiation field, which

is in turn determined by the emissivity of the radiating
sources and the opacity of the IGM to ionizing photons. Recent models of the UVB (Puchwein et al. 2019;
Khaire & Srianand 2019; Faucher-Giguère 2020), when
applied to cosmological simulations, result in a hydrogen reionization era that completes by z ∼ 6–8 in agreement with observational constraints (Davies et al. 2018;
Planck Collaboration et al. 2020).

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest

5

Figure 2. Photoionization (Γ, top) and photoheating (H, bottom) rates for neutral hydrogen (H I, left), neutral helium (He I,
center) and singly ionized helium (He II, right) from the reference P19 model (Puchwein et al. 2019) (red line) along with the
photoionization and photoheating rates (blue lines) used for the 400 simulations of the CHIPS grid. The modified rates are
generated by rescaling and shifting the reference P19 model as described in §2.4.

The updated model for the photoheating and photoionizing background presented in Puchwein et al.
(2019, hereafter P19) adopts an improved treatment of
the IGM opacity to ionizing radiation that consistently
captures the transition from a neutral to an ionized
IGM. To compute the intensity of the background radiation, the P19 model employs recent determinations of
the ionizing emissivity due to stars and AGNs and of the
H I absorber column density distribution, and assumes
an evolving escape fraction of ionizing radiation from
galaxies into the IGM that reaches 18%. When the P19
model is applied in cosmological simulations, hydrogen
reionization completes at z ∼ 6 consistently with recent
measurements (Becker et al. 2001; Bosman et al. 2018;
Becker et al. 2021; Qin et al. 2021). However, the subsequent evolution of the Lyman-α forest spectra measured
in simulations that use the P19 model fail to reproduce
the observed properties of the forest (Villasenor et al.
2021) and, in particular, do not agree with the observed
power spectrum of the Lyman-α transmitted flux over
the redshift range 2.2 ≤ z ≤ 5.0. This work aims to
present a new model photoionization and photoheating
rates that result in an evolution of the IGM consistent
with the observational measurements of the Lymanα flux power spectrum and the He II effective optical
depth.

2.4. Simulation Grid
To determine ionization and heating histories that result in properties of the IGM consistent with the observed Lyman-α flux power spectrum and He II effective
opacity, we perform an unprecedented grid consisting of
400 cosmological simulations as a direct extension of the
Cholla IGM Photoheating Simulations (CHIPS) suite
originally presented in Villasenor et al. (2021). Each
simulation in the CHIPS grid applies different photoionization and photoheating rates to model a variety of
reionization and thermal histories, and thereby produce
different statistical properties for the Lyman-α forest.
To generate different representations of the UVB, we
modify the reference model from Puchwein et al. (2019)
by rescaling the photoionization and photoheating rates
(Γ and H respectively) by a constant factor β and shifting the redshift dependence of the rates by an offset ∆z.
The two transformations are expressed as
Γ(z) → β ΓP19 (z − ∆z),
H(z) → β HP19 (z − ∆z).

(2)

Since the photoionization and photoheating rates for
both H I and He I are dominated by the same sources,
namely star-forming galaxies at z & 5 and AGNs at
lower redshifts, and the radiation that ionizes both

6

Villasenor et al.

species is absorbed by intergalactic hydrogen, we modify
the H I and He I photoionization and photoheating rates
jointly by applying the transformations described by
Eqs. (2), scaling and shifting by the parameters βH and
∆zH respectively. He II is reionized later in cosmic history primarily by the extreme UV radiation emitted by
AGNs, and we rescale and redshift-offset the photoionization and photoheating rates associated with He II by
a second set of parameters βHe and ∆zHe . Hence, each
modified UVB model is characterized by the parameter vector θ = {βH , ∆zH , βHe , ∆zHe }. The different
photoionization and photoheating histories span all the
combinations of the parameter values presented in Table
1.
The rescaling parameters βH and βHe control the intensity of the background radiation, determine the efficiency with which H I and He II become ionized, and
govern energy input into the IGM in the form of photoheating during the epochs of non-equilibrium reionization for hydrogen and helium. After reionization completes and the gas reaches photoionization equilibrium,
the balance between ionizations from the background
radiation and recombinations with free electrons determines the ionization state of H I and He II. At equilibrium, the ionized fraction of H I and He II is proportional to the photoionization rates ΓHI and ΓHeII respectively, and inversely proportional to the temperaturedependent radiative recombination rates αHII (T ) and
αHeIII (T ). Therefore, by rescaling the photoionization
and photoheating rates, we modify the evolution of the
temperature and the ionization state of the gas in the
IGM during and after H I and He II reionization.
The parameters ∆zH and ∆zHe shift the redshift dependence of the photoionization and photoheating rates
by a constant offset, affecting the timing of H I and
He II reionization. In general, an offset of ∆zH > 0 or
∆zHe > 0 moves H I or He II reionization to higher redshift and earlier cosmic time relative to the reference P19
model. Negative values of ∆zH or ∆zHe shift reionization to lower redshift and later cosmic times. The offset
in redshift of the models also affect the properties of the
IGM after H I and He II reionization complete, as the
photoheating and photoionization rates at a given redshift are generally modified when ∆zH 6= 0 or ∆zHe 6= 0.
Figure 2 shows the photoionization and photoheating
rates from the reference model by Puchwein et al. (2019)
together with the modified rates adopted in the 400 simulations of the CHIPS grid. In Villasenor et al. (2021),
we presented a comparison of the statistical properties of
the Lyman-α forest and the thermal history of the IGM
that result from a high-resolution simulation using the
UVB model from Puchwein et al. (2019). We concluded

Table 1. CHIPS Simulation Grid
Parameter

Parameter Values

βH
∆zH
βHe
∆zHe

0.60, 0.73, 0.86, 1.00
-0.6, -0.4, -0.2, 0.0, 0.2
0.10, 0.30, 0.53, 0.76, 1.00
-0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 0.8

Note—The parameters βH and ∆zH determine the amplitude and redshift offset
of the H I and He I photoionization and
photoheating rates, while βHe and ∆zHe
rescale and offset the He II rates.

that, in general, the gas in the simulation was too highly
ionized after hydrogen reionization and possibly too hot
during the epoch of helium reionization to be compatible with the observed statistics of the forest and other
inferences of the thermal state of the IGM. We therefore
do not include values of βH > 1 or βHe > 1 in our grid,
as such models would result in overall higher ionization
fractions and temperatures of the IGM compared with
the P19 case.
The simulations were run on the Summit system (Oak
Ridge Leadership Computing Facility at the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory). Each simulation was performed
on 128 GPUs and completed in less than two wall clock
hours. The cost of the entire grid of computations was
only ∼16,000 node hours. This work demonstrates that
by taking advantage of an efficient code like Cholla and
a capable system like Summit, future studies of the
IGM using thousands of cosmological simulations are
now possible.
2.5. Effects of UVB Models on the IGM Properties
The different photoionization and photoheating histories adopted in our simulations affect the ionization
state of hydrogen and helium and the temperature of the
IGM. Figure 3 shows the redshift evolution of the global
properties of the IGM for each of the simulated histories.
The top panels show the temperature of gas at mean
density T0 (left) and the index γ (right) of the power-law
density-temperature relation T (∆) = T0 ∆γ−1 , where
∆ = ρgas /ρ̄. The bottom panels show the volume
weighted average fraction of neutral hydrogen xHI (left)
and singly ionized helium xHeII (right).
As hydrogen becomes ionized at z & 5.5 the gas in
the IGM experiences a monotonic increase of T0 while
showing a close to isothermal distribution γ ∼ 1. After hydrogen reionization ends at z ∼ 5.5–6.5, the gas
cools primarily through the adiabatic expansion of the
Universe. During this period the low-density gas cools

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest

7

Figure 3. Evolution of global properties of the IGM computed form the 400 CHIPS simulations. The simulations evolve
under different photoionization and photoheating rates resulting in a large variety of ionization and thermal histories of the
IGM. The top panels show the the temperature, T0 , of intergalactic gas at the mean density (left) and the index γ from the
power-law density-temperature relation T (∆) = T0 ∆γ−1 (right). The bottom panels show the volume-weighted average of the
neutral hydrogen fraction xHI (left) and the singly ionized helium fraction xHeII (right). The amplitude and timing of the rates
impact the thermal state of the IGM during H I and He II reionization. Simulations with higher values of βHe result in a higher
temperature peak during He II reionization (2.5 . z . 3.8) and for simulations with ∆zHe > 0 the epoch of He II reionization is
shifted to earlier epochs. Analogously, negative values of ∆zH move the timing of H I reionization to later epochs and simulations
with different βH show a different temperature peak during H I reionization at z ∼ 5.6 − 6.3.

faster and γ increases. This first epoch of cooling ends
with the onset of helium (He II) reionization from the
extreme UV radiation emitted by AGNs at z . 4 − 5
which reheats the IGM, increasing T0 and decreasing γ.
After the double reionization of helium completes (z ∼
2.5–3.5) the IGM cools monotonically by adiabatic expansion increasing γ for a second time. Because of these
two distinct photoheating epochs, the thermal state of
the IGM in our simulations is more sensitive to variations in the hydrogen photoheating/photoionization parameters βH and ∆zH at z & 5, and more sensitive to
the parameters βHe and ∆zHe at z . 5 during the epoch
of helium reionization.

For simulations with ∆zH < 0 the temperature peak
from hydrogen reionization is shifted to later times
(lower redshift) and the amplitude of the temperature
peak depends on the value of βH . Analogously, the parameters βHe and ∆zHe determine the amplitude and
timing of the second peak in T0 caused by helium reionization. Positive values of ∆zHe move helium reionization to higher redshifts compared with the reference P19
model, and higher values of βHe produce a higher peak
in T0 during the epoch 2.5 . z . 3.8.
Variation in the timing of H and He reionization
changes the cooling periods during which the power-law
index γ increases. The different tracks of γ in our simu-

8

Villasenor et al.

Figure 4. Gas temperature from a slice through the IGM at z = 3.6 in a subset of 20 simulations with different He II
reionization scenarios. An increase in the parameters βHe and ∆zHe corresponds to higher He II photoheating and a shift of the
He II reionization epoch to earlier cosmic times (closer to z ∼ 3.6) respectively. Either effect increases the temperature of the
IGM at z ∼ 3.6.

lation grid then arise primarily from the different values
of ∆zH and ∆zHe adopted. In future work we plan to
expand the flexibility of our simulations to sample the
thermal state of the IGM by introducing density dependent photoheating rates which will allow for larger
variation in the evolution of γ.
The effects on the temperature of the IGM from the
different helium reionization scenarios in our simulations
are illustrated in Figure 4. The image displays the gas
temperature of a slice through the IGM at z = 3.6 generated from a subset of 20 simulations that vary the pa-

rameters βHe and ∆zHe controlling the He II photoionization and photoheating rates. Increases in βHe and
∆zHe correspond to a larger extreme UV background
from AGNs and to a shift of the epoch of helium reionization to earlier cosmic times, respectively. Either effect causes the temperature of the IGM to increase at
z ∼ 3.6. Decreasing the He II photoheating rates or
shifting helium reionization to later cosmic times (toward z ∼ 2.8) decreases the temperature of IGM gas at
z ∼ 3.6.

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest

9

Figure 5. Sensitivity of the Lyman-α flux power spectrum P (k) to independent variations of the parameters θ =
{βH , ∆zH , βHe , ∆zHe } for redshifts z = 3 (top) and z = 4 (bottom). Independent changes of each parameter have different effects on the redshift-dependent P (k). After hydrogen reionization completes, differences in the power spectrum at z . 5.5
arise from changes in the ionization state and temperature of the IGM. Variation of the parameters βH and ∆zH mostly affect the
ionization state of hydrogen and therefore the overall normalization of P (k). Changes in the parameters βHe and ∆zHe impact
P (k) through their effect on the temperature of the gas during and after helium reionization, as variations in the thermal state
of the IGM control the ionization fraction of hydrogen by its effect on the recombination rate αHII (T ), and lead to the Doppler
broadening of absorption lines and the smoothing of density fluctuations that suppress small-scale power (k & 0.02 s km−1 ).

2.6. Effects of UVB Models on the Lyman-α Forest
Power Spectrum
The statistical properties of the Lyman-α forest provide insight into the state of the baryons in the IGM.
The effective optical of the forest τeff,H = − ln hF i provides a global measurement of the overall H I content
of the gas in the IGM, probes the hydrogen ionization fraction, and allows for estimates of the intensity
of the ionizing background radiation. The power spectrum P (k) of the flux transmitted through the forest
contains more information encoded across different spatial scales. On scales larger than a few Mpc the P (k)
is sensitive to the ionization fraction of hydrogen in the
IGM and provides information similar to τeff,H . This
connection makes P (k) and τeff,H a dependent pair of
measurements, and §B presents a detailed analysis about

the effects that variations in τeff,H induce in P (k). On
scales smaller than a few comoving Mpc, structure in
the forest is suppressed by pressure smoothing of the
gas density fluctuations as well as Doppler broadening
of the absorption lines. These effects cause a cutoff in
the dimensionless power spectrum ∆2 (k) = π −1 kP (k)
for k & 0.02 s km−1 , making the flux power spectrum at
intermediate and small scales a sensitive probe of the
thermal state of IGM gas.
The different ionization and thermal histories produced by the range of photoionization and photoheating
rates adopted in our simulations manifest as variations
in the flux power spectrum of the Lyman-α forest. The
effects on P (k) from changing each of the four parameters βH , ∆zH , βHe , or ∆zHe independently is shown in
Figure 5 for redshifts z = 3 (top) and z = 4 (bottom).
The variation in P (k) measured from our simulation grid

10

Villasenor et al.

Figure 6. The transmitted flux power spectrum P (k) from observations by eBOSS (Chabanier et al. 2019), Keck Observatory
and the Very Large Telescope (Iršič et al. 2017b; Boera et al. 2019) used to constrain models of the cosmic photoionization
and photoheating history. The best-fit evolution of P (k) marginalized over the posterior distribution of the parameters θ =
{βH , ∆zH , βHe , ∆zHe } is shown with black curves, along with 95% confidence intervals (shaded bands). The fractional differences
from the observations and the best-fit model are shown in the bottom part of each panel. Overall, the best-fit P (k) is in good
agreement with the large-scale power spectrum from eBOSS for 2.4 ≤ z ≤ 4.2, and with the intermediate scales data from Iršič
et al. (2017b) at 3.0 ≤ z ≤ 4.2. Our best-fit results also agree with the measurements from Boera et al. (2019) at 4.2 ≤ z ≤ 5.0,
showing 10–30% differences mostly on the smallest scales (0.1 − 0.2 s km−1 ) and suggesting that the temperature of the IGM
at this epoch could be slightly overestimated by the model. We also show the P (k) determinations by Walther et al. (2018)
for comparison. Owing to discrepancies with the eBOSS results on large scales, we have not included the Walther et al. (2018)
data points in our MCMC analysis.

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest

Figure 7. Evolution of the singly ionized helium (He II) effective optical depth τeff,HeII from our simulation grid (blue
lines), along with the best-fit model (black line) and the 95%
confidence interval (gray area) obtained from our MCMC
marginalization. The orange points show the observational
measurements of τeff,HeII (Worseck et al. 2019). While only
data in the redshift range 2.4 . z . 2.9 were used as constraints for our statistical analysis, the observed lower limits
at z > 3 are consistent with the model results.

over the redshift range 2 . z . 5 can be attributed
mainly to three physical effects. First, since hydrogen
is in photoionization equilibrium after H I reionization,
changes to the photoionization rate ΓHI from rescaling
by βH or applying a shift ∆zH alter the ionization fraction of hydrogen. This alteration globally affects the hydrogen effective optical depth τeff,H and, as a result, the
overall normalization of P (k) changes. Second, changes
in the temperature of the IGM from the different hydrogen and helium reionization scenarios alter the recombination coefficient αHII (T ) in the IGM. In turn, changes
to the recombination rate adjust the ionization fraction
of hydrogen in the IGM and thereby the normalization of
P (k). Third, the different thermal histories of the IGM
affect P (k) on small scales through Doppler broadening of the absorption lines and the pressure smoothing
of the density fluctuations. As shown in Figure 5, the
parameters βH and ∆zH mainly influence the normalization of P (k) by changing the overall ionization fraction
in the IGM, while the parameters βHe and ∆zHe change
the temperature of the IGM and thereby affect both the
normalization and small-scale shape of P (k).
2.7. Observational Data
For comparison with our simulations, we use the observational determinations of the flux power spectrum
measured by the extended Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopy Survey (eBOSS; Chabanier et al. 2019) and
separate measurements with the Keck Observatory and

11

the Very Large Telescope (Iršič et al. 2017b; Boera et al.
2019). The power spectrum estimates from Chabanier
et al. (2019) probe mostly large scales (0.001 . k .
0.02 s km−1 ) in the redshift range 2.2 < z < 4.6. The
determinations from Iršič et al. (2017b) overlap with
the eBOSS measurements on the large scales, albeit
with lower precision, and extend to intermediate scales
(0.003 . k . 0.06 s km−1 ) for redshifts 3.0 < z < 4.2.
The data from Boera et al. (2019) cover intermediate to
small scales (0.006 . k . 0.2 s km−1 ) over the redshift
range 4.2 < z < 5.0. The combined data set spans a
large redshift range from z = 2.2 to z = 5.0 and a wide
range of scales, and is shown along with our best-fit
model P (k) in Figure 6.
Figure 6 also shows the observational measurements
of P (k) presented by Walther et al. (2018, purple empty
points) for the redshift range 3.0 ≤ z ≤ 3.4. We find
that, in the overlapping range of scales (0.003 . k .
0.02 s km−1 ) and redshift (2.2 . z . 3.4), the estimates from Walther et al. (2018) show significant differences with those from eBOSS (Chabanier et al. 2019).
The normalization and, in some cases, the shape of the
large-scale P (k) appear to be inconsistent between the
two datasets. For several redshift bins (e.g. z = 2.4
and z = 3.2), a simple renormalization applied to the
Walther et al. (2018) power spectrum would not be
sufficient to match the large-scale measurements from
eBOSS. Because of this discrepancy, we have not included the Walther et al. (2018) P (k) determinations in
our MCMC analysis, and we show them in Figure 6 only
for comparison with our modeling and other data sets.
To obtain a better determination of the He II photoionization and photoheating rates, we complement
the power spectrum comparison with observational
measurements of the helium effective optical depth
τeff,HeII (Worseck et al. 2019) over the redshift range
2.4 . z . 2.9 as additional constraints on our model.
The data are shown in Figure 7 along with the corresponding evolution of τeff,HeII from our simulation grid
and the best-fit model from our analysis. We do not
include the observational lower limits at z > 3 as constraints in our MCMC analysis, but our best-fit model
is consistent with those limits.
2.8. Systematic Uncertainties
When comparing models to observations, we include
systematic uncertainties owing to cosmological parameter variations and possible resolution limitations of the
simulations. In Villasenor et al. (2021), we performed a
study of the changes in the Lyman-α flux power spectrum P (k) induced by small variations of the cosmological parameters within the constraints from Planck

12

Villasenor et al.

Collaboration et al. (2020). Our results suggested that
uncertainties in the cosmological parameters could cause
a fractional change of . 5% on the hydrogen effective
optical depth in the redshift range 2 . z . 5 and a similar . 5% effect in P (k) for scales 0.002 . k . 0.2 s km−1
and redshifts 2 . z . 5. For this reason, we include here
an additional systematic uncertainty σcosmo of 5% to
the observational determinations of the Lyman-α power
spectrum. For the He II effective optical depth, we estimate similar variations of ∼ 5% at 2 . z . 3 from
differences in the mean baryonic density of different cosmologies. We therefore include a σcosmo = 5% to the
measurements of τeff,HeII as well.
In Appendix A we present a resolution convergence
study where we compare the forest flux power spectrum
from three simulations performed with the same cosmological parameters and photoionization and photoheating histories. The initial conditions used for the
runs were generated to preserve the large-scale modes
in common to each simulation, such that the properties
of the simulations could be compared directly on shared
spatial scales. The three simulations model a box of
size L = 50h−1 Mpc and N = 5123 , N = 10243 , or
N = 20483 cells and particles. The corresponding spatial resolutions are ∆x ' 98 h−1 Mpc, ∆x ' 49 h−1 Mpc,
and ∆x ' 24 h−1 Mpc, respectively. In comparing the
moderate resolution (∆x ' 49 h−1 Mpc) and high resolution (∆x ' 24 h−1 Mpc) simulations, we measure
small fractional differences ∆P (z, k)/P (z, k) of . 5%
for the large scales k . 0.02 s km−1 . On small scales,
0.02 . k . 0.2 s km−1 , the fractional differences are
slightly larger (. 12%).
To approximate resolution effects from the grid of
simulations used for our analysis (N = 10243 , ∆x '
49 h−1 Mpc), we add an additional systematic uncertainty σres to the observational determinations of the
flux power spectrum and the He II effective optical
depth. For P (k), the additional uncertainty σres (z, k) =
∆P (z, k) is set equal to the difference between P (k) from
the N = 10243 and N = 20483 reference simulations
used for our resolution study. For the He II effective optical depth the impact of resolution is a small increase
of . 3% from the N = 10243 box to the N = 20483 run
at z < 3; we then add an uncertainty of σres (z) = 3% to
the estimate of τeff,HeII . We note that the systematic errors added to τeff,HeII are significantly smaller than the
observational uncertainties σobs ∼ 12 − 45% of Worseck
et al. (2019).

The total uncertainty applied to the observational determinations of P (k) and τeff,HeII is finally given by the
quadrature sum of the errors as
σtotal =

q
2 + σ2
2
σobs
cosmo + σres

(3)

where σobs is the reported observational uncertainty in
the flux power spectrum or helium opacity respectively.
In their study, Wolfson et al. (2021) showed the importance of using the covariance matrix when inferring
the temperature of the IGM from measurements of the
Lyman-α power spectrum and wavelet statistics. For
our MCMC analysis we use the covariance matrices of
P (k) in the likelihood calculation (see §2.9). To reflect
the increased uncertainty from Eq. 3, we rescale the
elements of the covariance matrices according to
C[i, j] = Cobs [i, j]

σtotal,i σtotal,j
,
σobs,i σobs,j

(4)

where Cobs is the reported covariance matrix of P (k)
taken from the published observational datasets used
for our analysis.
2.9. Inference of the UVB Model
To find the photoionization and photoheating rates
that best reproduce the properties of the IGM encoded
in the flux power spectrum of the Lyman-α forest P (k)
and the helium effective optical depth τeff,HeII , we apply an MCMC sampler to compare the simulated P (k)
and τeff,HeII to the observational measurements over the
redshift and frequency range where data are available.
The likelihood function for the model given by the parameters θ = {βH , ∆zH , βHe , ∆zHe } is evaluated as:
"
#
2

1X
τobs (z) − τ (z|θ)
ln L(θ) = −
+ ln 2πστ (z)2
2 z
στ (z)

1 X X  T −1
∆ C ∆ + ln det(C) + N ln 2π ,
−
2
datasets z
(5)
where the first term compares the He II effective optical depth measured from our simulations τ (z|θ) for
a given photoionization and photoheating model represented by the vector θ to the observational measurement τobs (z) from Worseck et al. (2019) with total (observational + systematic) uncertainty στ (z). The second term compares the Lyman-α power spectrum, with
∆ denoting the difference vector between the observations and the model ∆ = Pobs (z, k) − P (z, k|θ). Here,
C corresponds to the covariance matrix of size N × N
associated with the observational determination, where
N is the number of points of each measurement. To

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest

13

Figure 8. Results from the Bayesian inference procedure, showing one- and two-dimensional projections of the posterior
distributions for the parameters θ = {βH , ∆zH , βHe , ∆zHe }. The parameter constraints were obtained by fitting the observed
flux power spectrum of the Lyman-α forest and the He II effective optical depth (Chabanier et al. 2019; Boera et al. 2019;
Worseck et al. 2019; Iršič et al. 2017b) with a grid of CHIPS simulations. The posterior distribution shows a clear global
maximum, and while other local maxima are present their peak likelihoods are significantly lower than the global maximum.
The resulting best-fit parameters and their 95% confidence intervals are shown in the top right corner.

14

Villasenor et al.

compute P (z, k|θ) and τ (z|θ) for arbitrary values of the
parameters θ not directly simulated by our grid, we perform a four-dimensional linear interpolation of the sixteen neighboring simulations in parameter space.
As described in §2.7, we employ the datasets from
Chabanier et al. (2019) (2.2 ≤ z ≤ 4.6), Iršič et al.
(2017b) (3.0 ≤ z ≤ 4.2), and Boera et al. (2019)
(4.2 ≤ z ≤ 5.0) for the observational measurements of
the power spectrum used in our analysis. While there
is some overlap in the measurements from the datasets,
in general their determinations are consistent with each
other. For this reason we include all the data points from
each dataset for the likelihood calculation. The only significant discrepancy is at z = 4.6 where P (k) from Chabanier et al. (2019) is lower to the determination from
Boera et al. (2019). We repeated our the analysis excluding the z = 4.6 measurement from Chabanier et al.
(2019) and obtained similar posterior distributions. We
conclude that this difference does not impact our result.
The contribution from each redshift bin to the total
log likelihood ln L (Eq. 5) from P (k) and τeff,HeII in
our analysis is presented in Table 2.9. The quantity
∆ ln L is evaluated as the first and second terms of Eq. 5
for τeff,HeII and P (k), respectively, for each redshift bin.
The power spectrum mostly strongly influences the log
likelihood, with data from redshifts z = 2.4 and z = 4.2
inducing the largest fractional changes in the likelihood.
Table 2. Redshift bin contribution to the Likelihood
Type

z

−∆ ln L

Type

z

−∆ ln L

P (k)
P (k)
P (k)
P (k)
P (k)
P (k)
P (k)
P (k)
P (k)
P (k)

2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4.0

330.6
363.3
229.2
297.0
215.1
134.4
113.8
84.1
137.1
180.3

P (k)
P (k)
P (k)
P (k)

4.2
4.4
4.6
5.0
2.30
2.54
2.66
2.74
2.82

489.2
135.7
190.2
40.0
0.5
0.2
0.3
1.0
2.3

τeff,HeII
τeff,HeII
τeff,HeII
τeff,HeII
τeff,HeII

The covariance matrices of P (k) are taken from the
published observations. We note that Iršič et al. (2017b)
provides the complete covariance of P (k) across the
seven redshift bins of their measurement. For this
dataset we employ the reported full covariance and the
residual vector ∆ consists of the P (k) difference from
the model and observation concatenated over the seven
redshift bins.

While our likelihood analysis uses the reported covariance matrices from the observations, in Appendix C we
present the covariance of P (k) measured from a subset
of our simulations to quantify the differences induced by
variation of our four model parameters. We show that
the structure of the covariance is mantained across our
simulations and we measure relatively small variations
between the different models.
We emphasize that our approach differs from previous
studies of the thermal history of the IGM (e.g., Bolton
et al. 2014; Nasir et al. 2016; Hiss et al. 2018; Boera
et al. 2019; Walther et al. 2019; Gaikwad et al. 2020a)
in an important aspect. Typically, the method adopted
to infer the thermal state of the IGM from observations
of the Lyman-α forest involves marginalizing over the
thermal parameters T0 and γ in the approximate powerlaw density-temperature relation (Hui & Gnedin 1997)
T (∆) = T0 ∆γ−1 , where ∆ = ρgas /ρ̄ is the gas overdensity. This marginalization is often performed independently for each redshift. Instead, our approach to
find the optimal photoionization and photoheating rates
that best reproduce the observational measurements is
to compare the simulated P (k) and τeff,HeII to the observations over the full redshift range where data is available, namely 2.2 ≤ z ≤ 5.0 for P (k) and 2.2 < z < 3.0
for τeff,HeII .
In our approach, the performance for a given UVB
model to match the observations is evaluated over the
complete self-consistently evolved reionization and thermal history of the IGM that results from that model.
Since the properties of the gas at one redshift cannot be
disentangled from its properties at previous epochs, the
thermal and ionization structure of the forest depends
on the time-dependent photoheating and photoionization rate. Both T0 and γ evolve along continuous trajectories with redshift, and we therefore marginalize over
the full simulated histories of IGM properties.
Our simulations span a wide range of reionization histories for hydrogen in the IGM. Instead of following
the common practice of rescaling the optical depth of
the simulated skewers in post-processing to match the
observed mean transmission of the forest, our method
self-consistently follows the ionization evolution of hydrogen and the effective optical depth τeff,H encoded in
the redshift-dependent power spectrum of the transmitted flux. Furthermore, during our inference procedure,
we do not assume a power-law approximation for the
density-temperature distribution of IGM gas or apply a
post-processing procedure that artificially modifies the
temperature of the gas in the simulations. Instead, our
synthetic Lyman-α spectra reflect the real ρgas −T distribution from the simulations. This improvement proves

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest
relevant, as we find that a single power law is not a good
fit over the full range of gas densities responsible for the
bulk of the Lyman-α absorption signal (see Appendix
E).
The posterior distribution for our parameters θ =
{βH , ∆zH , βHe , ∆zHe } resulting from the Bayesian inference procedure is shown in Figure 8. A clear global
maximum of the posterior distribution is observed, and
while the posterior shows other local maxima their likelihoods are significantly lower than the global peak. The
four model parameters are well constrained and show
only small correlations that arise from the weak degeneracies in the resulting ionization and thermal histories
produced by the different photoionization and photoheating rates. Our best-fit parameters and their 95%
confidence limits are
+0.04
βH = 0.81−0.03

+0.14
∆zH = −0.09−0.24

+0.13
βHe = 0.47−0.09

∆zHe = 0.25+0.09
−0.07 .

(6)

To measure the properties of the IGM that result from
our best-fit distribution, we sample P (k), τeff,H , and
τeff,HeII , together with the thermal parameters T0 and γ,
over the posterior distribution of the parameter vector
θ, resulting in determinations of the highest-likelihood
and 95% confidence interval for the forest statistics and
thermal history. When necessary, we interpolate results
for values of θ not directly simulated by our grid.
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

By comparing the flux power spectrum and the He II
effective opacity in our CHIPS simulation grid to observational determinations, we can infer a set of photoionization and photoheating histories that, when input in
cosmological hydrodynamical simulations, result in statistical properties of the Lyman-α forest that are consistent with observations. In this section, we present the
best-fit rates obtained from our inference procedure, as
well as the Lyman-α forest statistics and thermal evolution of the IGM produced by our best-fit UVB model.
We compare our results to previous work and finalize our
discussion by describing the limitations of our method.
3.1. Best-Fit Photoionization and Photoheating Rates
Figure 9 shows our best-fit model for the photoionization and photoheating rates along with the corresponding 95% confidence interval that results from our MCMC
marginalization of the UVB rates over the posterior distribution of the model parameters obtained from our
MCMC analysis. We note that the transformations applied in this work to generate new photoionization and
photoheating rates from the reference model (Puchwein

15

et al. 2019) are relatively simple and preserve the functional form of the P19 model. While we allow for orders
of magnitude variations in the rates, the flexibility of the
ionization and thermal histories sampled here is limited
by the fixed shape of the UVB model employed in our
simulation grid. A study that allows for more flexibility
in the photoionization and photoheating rates of hydrogen and helium will be the scope of future work.
3.2. P (k) Model Comparison with the Data
Figure 6 shows the evolution of the best-fit flux power
spectrum and 95% confidence intervals over the redshift
range 2.2 ≤ z ≤ 5.0 that result from marginalizing
P (k) over the posterior distribution of model parameters θ = {βH , ∆zH , βHe , ∆zHe }. Our best-fit synthetic
power spectrum shows good agreement with the large
scale P (k) measured by the eBOSS experiment (Chabanier et al. 2019) in the range 2.4 . z . 4.2, suggesting that the mean transmission hF i of the forest
inferred by our analysis is consistent with the measurements by Chabanier et al. (2019). Only for z = 2.2 and
z = 4.4 − 4.6 do our results show significant differences
with the eBOSS data set. At z = 2.2, the P (k) from
eBOSS is higher than our results by ∼ 8 − 20% on scales
0.008 . k . 0.02 s km−1 . This modest tension may suggest that the hydrogen opacity τeff,H is underestimated
by ∼ 10% in our modeling relative to eBOSS. At z = 4.4
and z = 4.6 the opposite is true, and our best-fit P (k) on
large scales is ∼ 15% and ∼ 25% higher than the eBOSS
measurements, respectively. These small discrepancies
could be alleviated, e.g., by a small 15% decrease of the
H I photoionization rate at z = 2.2 and by a comparable
small increase in the same quantity at z = 4.4 − 4.6 by
∼ 10 − 20%.
Our results also agree on large and intermediate
scales (0.003 . k . 0.06 s km−1 ) with the estimates
of Iršič et al. (2017b). The best-fit model reproduces
the turnover in the observed dimensionless power spectrum ∆2 (k) = π −1 kP (k) at k ∼ 0.02 − 0.03 s km−1 , and
generally lies within the observational uncertainties at
intermediate scales 0.01 . k . 0.06 s km−1 . Only at
redshift z = 3.4 and z = 3.8 the P (k) measurements
show some differences relative to the model. At z = 3.4
the data are higher than the model by ∼ 5 − 20%. A
similar discrepancy is observed when comparing Iršič
et al. (2017b) with the determinations by eBOSS at the
same redshift, suggestive of a slightly higher H I opacity
τeff,H in the former sample. Differences with the model
are more significant at z = 3.8, where on intermediate
scales (k & 0.2 s km−1 ) the measurements of Iršič et al.
(2017b) are lower than the model by ∼ 10 − 20%, while
on large scales (k . 0.2 s km−1 ) their estimates are

16

Villasenor et al.

Figure 9. Best-Fit (black lines) and 95% confidence intervals (grey bands) for the photoionization (Γ, top) and photoheating
(H, bottom) rates for neutral hydrogen (H I, left), neutral helium (He I, center), and singly ionized helium (He II, right) obtained
from our MCMC analysis. The modified H I and He I photoionization and photoheating rates (dashed blue lines) are identical to
the reference best-fit model except for the redshift range 4.8 ≤ z ≤ 6.1 where they have been modified to produce an evolution
of the hydrogen effective optical depth consistent with the observational determinations of Bosman et al. (2018) for z > 5 (see
§3.4 and §3.5 for details). For reference, we also show the models from Puchwein et al. (2019) (red) and Haardt & Madau (2012)
(cyan).

Figure 10. Redshift evolution of the gas temperature from a high-resolution simulation (L = 50 h−1 Mpc, N = 20483 cells and
particles) that employed our best-fit model for the photoheating and photoionization rates. The image displays the monotonic
increase in the temperature of the IGM due to hydrogen reionization for z & 6.0 followed by an epoch of cooling of the IGM
due to cosmic expansion. The onset of helium reionization (z ∼ 4.5) initiates a second epoch of heating of the IGM that ends
at z ∼ 3 when He II reionization completes. A second epoch of cooling due to cosmic expansion then follows. The temperature
increase of gas collapsing into the filamentary cosmic web as large-scale structure develops is also visible in the image.

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest
higher than both the model and the determinations by
eBOSS by ∼ 5 − 30%.
Our model is in good agreement with the high-redshift
measurements of P (k) by Boera et al. (2019), with minor differences that could be addressed by small modifications to the early photoheating history. At z = 4.2,
z = 4.6, and z = 5.0, our best-fit P (k) is consistent with
their data points on large scales k . 0.02 s km−1 , suggesting that our inferred IGM H I opacity matches that
measured by Boera et al. (2019). The model also reproduces the cutoff in ∆2 (k) at k ∼ 0.02 − 0.03 s km−1 and
the consistency with the observations extends to small
scales k . 0.1 s km−1 . Discrepancies appear only on the
smallest scales 0.1 . k . 0.2 s km−1 where the model
has less power (∼ 10 − 30%) than Boera et al. (2019).
This may suggest that the temperature of the IGM has
been overestimated by the model in the redshift range
4 . z . 5 (see §3.3 for a discussion of this issue).
3.3. Evolution of the IGM Temperature
The flux power spectrum and helium opacity tightly
constrain the time-dependent photoionization and photoheating rates, which in turn determine the IGM ionization and thermal history. The redshift evolution of
the gas temperature is illustrated in Figure 10 which is
generated from a slice through a high-resolution simulation (L = 50 h−1 Mpc, N = 20483 cells and particles) using our best-fit photoionization and photoheating rates.
The figure shows the monotonic increase in the temperature of the IGM during hydrogen reionization at z & 6.
After hydrogen reionization completes by z ∼ 6, the input of energy into the IGM falls dramatically, and the
gas then cools primarily through adiabatic expansion.
This first epoch of IGM cooling lasts until the onset of
helium reionization (z ∼ 4.5) when extreme UV radiation from AGNs ionizes He II atoms and drives a second
epoch of reheating that completes by z ∼ 3 and is followed by a second epoch of adiabatic cooling.
The thermal state of diffuse IGM gas is often modeled with the power-law relation (Hui & Gnedin 1997;
Puchwein et al. 2015; McQuinn 2016)
T (∆) = T0 ∆γ−1 .

(7)

We fit the power law relation to the gas densitytemperature distribution in each of the simulations from
the CHIPS grid and at multiple epochs, 2 ≤ z ≤ 9,
following the procedure presented in Villasenor et al.
(2021). We restrict the fit to the overdensity range
0 ≤ log10 ∆ ≤ 1, as we find that in our simulations a
single power law does not accurately describe the wider
range −1 ≤ log10 ∆ ≤ 1 (see Appendix E).

17

Figure 11 shows the redshift evolution of the parameters T0 and γ from our best-fit model and the 95% confidence interval that results from our MCMC marginalization over the posterior distribution of the photoionization and photoheating rates. For comparison, we also
depict the data points for these parameters inferred from
the properties of the Lyman-α forest by Bolton et al.
(2014), Hiss et al. (2018), Boera et al. (2019), Walther
et al. (2019), Gaikwad et al. (2020b), and Gaikwad et al.
(2020a).
The inference from Boera et al. (2019) and Walther
et al. (2019) follow similar methodologies. They generate flux power spectra from simulations run with different thermal histories, resulting in multiples trajectories
for the evolution of T0 and γ. For each redshift bin
they determine the best-fit T0 , γ, and mean transmitted
flux hF i by performing Bayesian inference and comparing the simulated flux power spectra to observations of
the Lyman-α forest P (k). Bolton et al. (2014) and Hiss
et al. (2018) measure a set of values for the Doppler
parameter b and H I column density NHI directly from
the forest by decomposing the absorption spectra into
a collection of Voigt profiles. They infer the parameters T0 and γ by comparing simulations with different
b−NHI distributions to the observed one. Gaikwad et al.
(2020b) follow a similar approach by comparing simulated Lyman-α forest spectra to Voigt profiles fitted to
the observed transmission spikes in the inverse transmitted flux 1 − F at z > 5. Gaikwad et al. (2020a) report
more precise determinations by inferring T0 and γ from
the combined constraints obtained through a comparison of simulated Lyman-α forest absorption with the observed flux power spectra, b − NHI distributions, wavelet
statistics, and curvature statistics.
As shown in Figure 11, the temperature evolution
from our best-fit model presents a first peak (T0 '
1.3×104 K) at the end of hydrogen reionization (z ∼ 6.0)
followed by an epoch of adiabatic cooling from cosmic
expansion. Our results agree well with the high redshift
measurements of T0 and γ at 5.4 ≤ z ≤ 5.8 from Gaikwad et al. (2020b). We note that their estimates also
suggest a period of cooling at these epochs, and from
their result it is possible to infer a peak in T0 from H
reionization sometime at redshift z & 5.8.
In our model, the IGM continues to cool until the onset of helium reionization, and the temperature reaches
a local minimum of T0 (z ∼ 4.5) ' 9.5 × 103 K. Evidence
of this transition can also be seen in the measurements
from Boera et al. (2019), where T0 shows little evolution
from z = 5.0 to z = 4.6 and then a slight increase to
z = 4.2. Nevertheless, there are significant differences
between T0 from the model at 4 . z . 5 and the mea-

18

Villasenor et al.

Figure 11. Redshift evolution of the parameters T0 and γ [Eq. (7)] from the best-fit model (black lines) and 95% confidence
interval (gray band) obtained from our MCMC analysis. The data points show the values of T0 and γ inferred from observations
of the Lyman-α forest by Bolton et al. (2014); Hiss et al. (2018); Boera et al. (2019); Walther et al. (2019); Gaikwad et al.
(2020b,a). Our results reveal two peaks in the evolution of T0 due to hydrogen reionization at z ∼ 6 and helium reionization at
z ∼ 3, and are consistent with previous measurements from Gaikwad et al. (2020b,a).

surements from Boera et al. (2019), as the temperature
predicted by our model is higher than their inferred values of T0 ∼ 7.4×103 K and T0 ∼ 8.1×103 K at z = 4.6−5
and z = 4.2, respectively. The higher temperatures in
our model reflect a suppressed power spectrum of the
Lyman-α flux on small scales (0.1 . k . 0.2 s km−1 )
compared to the P (k) measurement from Boera et al.
(2019) at 4.2 ≤ z ≤ 5.0 (see Figure 6). Decreasing the
photoheating from the UVB during z & 4 would decrease the temperature of the IGM at this epoch and
potentially alleviate this discrepancy.
In Appendix D we present scenarios were the midredshift IGM is set to be colder compared to our model
by decreasing the best-fit H I and He I photoheating
rates at 4.2 ≤ z ≤ 6.2. We find that reducing HHI and
HHeI by ∼ 80% at z ∼ 6 decreases the IGM temperature
T0 by ∼ 20% making it consistent with the estimates
from Boera et al. (2019) at 4.2 ≤ z ≤ 5.0 with minimal
impact in T0 at z . 3.5 (see Figure 21). Nevertheless,
we find that such colder evolution of T0 is in conflict
with the z ∼ 5.4 estimate from Gaikwad et al. (2020b)
(see Figure 21). This conflict indicates some degree of
tension between the higher T0 = 1.10 ± 0.16 × 104 K
at z ∼ 5.4 from Gaikwad et al. (2020b) and the low
3
T0 = 7.37+1.13
−1.39 × 10 K at z ∼ 5.0 from Boera et al.
(2019).
After z ∼ 4.5, radiation from AGN ionizes He II atoms
in the Universe and heats the IGM for a second time.
Our model predicts that T0 increases monotonically until He II reionization completes at z ∼ 3, resulting in a

second peak in the temperature (T0 ' 1.4 × 104 K) followed by a second epoch of cooling due to cosmic expansion. Our results for the evolution of T0 during z . 4.5
are consistent with the determinations from Gaikwad
et al. (2020a) and Walther et al. (2019) that show a
similar T0 history within the uncertainties during and
after He II reionization, as both show a peak in T0 at
z ∼ 2.8 − 3.0. Our T0 (z) results are higher yet consistent within the uncertainties from the measurement by
Bolton et al. (2014) at z = 2.4. The results presented by
Hiss et al. (2018) also show the effects of He II reionization on the temperature of the IGM in the form a peak
in the temperature at z ∼ 2.8, but their peak value of
T0 ∼ 2 × 104 K is significantly higher than our result
and the measurements from Gaikwad et al. (2020b) and
Walther et al. (2019).
The right panel of Figure 11 shows our result for the
evolution of the density-temperature power-law index
γ (black line and shaded 95% confidence interval). At
the end of hydrogen reionization, the gas in the IGM
is mostly isothermal (γ ∼ 1). As the IGM cools and
the low-density gas cools more efficiently, the index γ
increases in the interval 4.5 . z . 6. During the reheating of the IGM from He II reionization, low-density
gas heats faster and γ decreases until helium reionization completes. After helium reionization cooling from
cosmic expansion causes an increase on γ for a second
time.
The evolution of the power-law index in our model is
consistent with measurements from Hiss et al. (2018),

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest
Boera et al. (2019), Gaikwad et al. (2020b), and Gaikwad et al. (2020a), and shows deviations only for a few
redshift bins after He II reionization completes. The
transition in γ after He II reionization in our model is
not as pronounced as the determinations from Gaikwad
et al. (2020a) and Hiss et al. (2018).
The results from Walther et al. (2019) show significantly higher values of γ compared to all the other measurements. We have evaluated the plausibility of a steep
density-temperature relation (γ > 1.6) by simulating the
extreme case in which all photoheating and photoionization from the UVB stops after hydrogen reionization
completes, i.e. Γ = 0 and H = 0 for z > 6. We find that
in the absence of external heating, as the IGM cools by
adiabatic expansion, the overdensities cool down at a
slower rate from compression by gravitational collapse.
Here γ tends to increase with decreasing redshift at a
roughly constant rate of ∆γ/|∆z| ∼ 0.18. Starting from
an isothermal distribution of the gas in the IGM when
H reionization finishes (γ = 1), it takes a change in redshift |∆z| ∼ 3 − 3.5 for the gas distribution to steepen
to γ ∼ 1.6. Hence, we can reproduce values of γ > 1.6
at z ∼ 5 only if hydrogen reionization completes very
early at z > 8.
3.4. Evolution of the Hydrogen Effective Optical Depth
The H I effective optical depth τeff,H = − lnhF i measured from the Lyman-α forest reflects the overall H I
content of the gas in the IGM. Hence, τeff,H probes the
ionization state of hydrogen in the medium and can be
used to constrain the intensity of the ionizing UVB. In
our work, constraints obtained for the H I photoionization rate ΓHI derive from the power spectrum of the
Lyman-α transmitted flux itself as we do not include
the observational determinations of τeff,H as constraints
in our inference procedure.
The power spectrum P (k) of the flux fluctuations [Eq.
(1)] is itself sensitive to the hydrogen effective optical
depth. Because of the non-linear relation F = exp(−τ ),
the normalization of P (k) on most scales relevant to this
work (0.002 . k . 0.1 s km−1 ) is affected by the value of
τeff,H obtained from the skewer sample used for the measurement. Thus, including the effective optical depth of
the forest does not provide additional independent information for constraining the model. See Appendix B
for a discussion on the impact that H I τeff has on the
Lyman-α flux power spectrum.
Figure 12 shows the redshift dependence of τeff,H from
our best-fit determination of the photoheating and photoionization rates (black line) and the corresponding
95% confidence interval. Data points in the figure show
the observational measurements of τeff,H reported by

19

Figure 12. Redshift evolution of the hydrogen effective
optical depth τeff,H from our best-fit determination of the
photoheating and photoionization rates (black line) and the
corresponding 95% confidence interval. Data points show
the observational measurements of τeff from Fan et al. (2006),
Becker et al. (2013), Bosman et al. (2018), Eilers et al. (2018),
Boera et al. (2019), and Yang et al. (2020a). The model
results show consistency with the measurement from Becker
et al. (2013) (yellow) for 2.5 . z . 4.2 and are in good
agreement with the determination from Boera et al. (2019)
(green) for 4.2 . z . 5.0. At high redshift (z > 5) the
results from Yang et al. (2020a) lie significantly higher than
those from Eilers et al. (2018) and Bosman et al. (2018)
by ∼ 10 − 30%. In the redshift range 5 . z . 5.8, the
model shows lower τeff,H compared with the observations. By
modifying the best-fit H I photoionization rate ΓHI as shown
in §3.7, we can obtain a high-z evolution of τeff,H (dashed
blue) consistent with the measurement from Bosman et al.
(2018) and Fan et al. (2006).

Fan et al. (2006), Becker et al. (2013), Bosman et al.
(2018), Eilers et al. (2018), Boera et al. (2019), and Yang
et al. (2020a). Our results are consistent with the evolution of H I τeff measured by Becker et al. (2013) (yellow
points) for the redshift range 2.5 . z . 4.2. Our model
results in a more opaque IGM compared to their measurements at lower redshifts 2.2 . z . 2.5 and higher
redshifts 4.2 . z . 4.8. Our model agrees well with the
determination from Boera et al. (2019) (green points)
during the redshift range 4.2 . z . 5.0.
At high redshift (z > 5), the measurements of the H I
effective optical depth from Bosman et al. (2018) (red
points), Eilers et al. (2018) (cyan points), and Fan et al.
(2006) (orange points) are similar, with only small differences (< 12%) toward higher τeff,H from Eilers et al.
(2018) compared with Bosman et al. (2018). The measurements by Yang et al. (2020a) (purple points) suggest
a more opaque IGM with a τeff,H that is significantly

20

Villasenor et al.

higher (∼ 20 − 30%) compared to the measurements by
Bosman et al. (2018).
Shortly after hydrogen reionization completes (5 .
z . 5.8), our best-fit UVB model significantly underestimates τeff,H compared with the observational measurements, suggesting that the hydrogen in the IGM is overly
ionized in our model at these redshifts. To address this
possible discrepancy, we can modify our best-fit result
for the H I photoionization rate such that ΓHI is reduced
only in the redshift range 4.8 < z < 5.8 and increased
for 5.8 < z < 6.1 (see §3.5 and §3.7). As shown in Figure 12, the high redshift evolution (z > 5) of τeff,H from
the modified model (dashed blue line) is consistent with
the measurements from Bosman et al. (2018). The subsequent evolution at redshifts z < 4.8 remains virtually unchanged from the best-fit model as hydrogen is
in photoionization equilibrium at these times and the
ionization fraction is therefore determined by the instantaneous amplitude of the H I photoionization rate ΓHI .
We refer the reader to §3.7 for a discussion on the effect
that the modified UVB model has on the properties of
the gas in the IGM.
By providing a simple modification to our best-fit
UVB model that allows to change the high-redshift evolution of the hydrogen effective optical depth to achieve
consistency with the observation and with minimal impact on the subsequent evolution of the properties of the
IGM for z . 5.0, we show that the high-z discrepancy
of the observed τeff,H and the model is not a significant
challenge to our results and the conclusions of this work.

3.5. Hydrogen Photoionization Rate
Our best-fit model results for the hydrogen photoionization rate ΓHI provide several opportunities for comparisons with observations, even though observationally
inferred ΓHI measurements are not used to constrain
our model. There are observational determinations of
ΓHI informed by simulations where the photoionization
rate is rescaled to match the observational hF i (Becker
& Bolton 2013; D’Aloisio et al. 2018). Our results can
also be compared to estimates of ΓHI from the quasar
proximity effect and the size of the near-zone of high
Lyman-α transmission around quasars (Calverley et al.
2011; Wyithe & Bolton 2011). Observations have measured ΓHI by detecting the florescent Lyman-α emission
produced by the Lyman limit systems (LLS) illuminated
by background radiation (Gallego et al. 2021). Finally,
there are ΓHI determinations from combining the PDF
and power spectrum of the Lyman-α transmitted flux
from observations with simulations that apply different
photoionization rates ΓHI (Gaikwad et al. 2017).

Figure 13. Evolution of the hydrogen photoionization rate
ΓHI from our best-fit determination and the 95% confidence
interval (black line and shaded region). Data show observationally inferred photoionization rates measured by Calverley et al. (2011), Wyithe & Bolton (2011), Becker & Bolton
(2013), Gaikwad et al. (2017),D’Aloisio et al. (2018), and
Gallego et al. (2021). A modified model for ΓHI designed to
match the observational measurements of τeff,H from Bosman
et al. (2018, see Figure 12) is shown as the dashed blue line.
Our models agree well with the observationally-inferred results, except for visible differences with the estimate from
Becker & Bolton (2013) during 4 . z . 5. These differences
in ΓHI reflect small differences between our best-fit model
predictions for τeff,H and the observational τeff,H measurement by Becker et al. (2013) over this redshift range.

Figure 13 shows our result for the HI photoionization rate with the corresponding 95% confidence limits
(black line and shaded band) along with the observational inferences of ΓHI mentioned above. Our result
is consistent with the previous observational determinations that show a rapid evolution in ΓHI for z & 5.6,
followed by a gradual increase during 2 . z . 5.6 and
a rapid decrease at z < 2. The only visible differences
with Becker & Bolton (2013) occur in the redshift range
4 . z . 4.8. Their measurement was obtained by tuning
the photoionization rate ΓHI in simulations such that the
Lyα effective optical depth τeff,H was consistent with the
observational measurement from Becker et al. (2013).
The higher estimate of ΓHI from their result reflects the
lower τeff,H from Becker et al. (2013) compared with the
evolution of τeff,H from our model for the redshift range
4.2 . z . 4.8, as shown in Figure 12.
As described in §3.4, shortly after hydrogen reionization completes our best-fit model significantly underestimates the Lyman-α effective optical depth τeff,H compared with the observations in the redshift range 5 .
z . 5.8. To address this discrepancy, we presented an
alternative model where the sharp transition in ΓHI at

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest

Figure 14. Redshift evolution of the volume-weighted neutral fraction of hydrogen for our best-fit model and the corresponding 95% confidence interval (black line and shaded region). Data points show the observational estimates reported
in Fan et al. (2006), McGreer et al. (2011, 2015), Greig et al.
(2017, 2019), Mason et al. (2018, 2019), Hoag et al. (2019),
Jung et al. (2020), Yang et al. (2020b), and Wang et al.
(2020). For z & 7 the observational estimates show a wide
range of xHI , from xHI ∼ 0.2 to xHI ∼ 0.8. Our models
result in a z ∼ 7 − 8 neutral fraction of xHI ∼ 0.4 − 0.5, consistent with the results from Greig et al. (2017), Jung et al.
(2020), and Yang et al. (2020b). After hydrogen reionization
completes at z . 6.0, our best-fit model shows an evolution of xHI below the measurement by Fan et al. (2006). By
modifying our best-fit photoionization rates to better match
τeff,H (see Figure 12), we can also better match the xHI data
from Fan et al. (2006) (dashed blue line).

z ∼ 5.6 from the original best-fit model is replaced by
a softer increase that extends over the redshift range
4.8 < z < 5.8 (dashed blue line in Figure 13). Decreasing ΓHI during this epoch increases the neutral fraction
of hydrogen in the IGM in photoionization equilibrium,
thereby increasing τeff . Our modified model for ΓHI was
chosen such that the resulting evolution of τeff,H is consistent with the observational measurement presented by
Bosman et al. (2018)(dashed blue line in Figure 12), and
the altered transition of ΓHI from our modified model is
still within the uncertainties of the observational inference by D’Aloisio et al. (2018) in the redshift interval
4.8 . z . 5.8.
3.6. Ionization History
We present the redshift evolution of the volumeweighted neutral fraction of hydrogen xHI resulting from
our best-fit determination of the UVB model and the
corresponding 95% confidence limits (black line and
shaded band) in Figure 14. For comparison we show
several observational estimates. We show constraints

21

Figure 15. Thomson optical depth from electron-scattering
of the CMB τe from the best-fit model and the 95% confidence limit (black line and shaded bar) and our modified
model to match the z > 5 τeff,H (dashed blue line). Also
shown are the observational measurements from the Planck
satellite presented in Planck Collaboration et al. (2020) and
the constraint from de Belsunce et al. (2021). Our model
results for τe lie within the Planck limits.

from the optical depth of the Lyman-α, Lyman-β, and
Lyman-γ transitions in the forest (Fan et al. 2006). We
also show constraints on the IGM neutrality from properties of Lyman-α emission from galaxies at high redshift (Hoag et al. 2019; Mason et al. 2018, 2019) and
the damping wing absorption in the spectra of z & 7
quasars (Greig et al. 2017, 2019; Jung et al. 2020; Yang
et al. 2020b; Wang et al. 2020). Finally, we show constraints from the covering fraction of dark pixels in the
Lyα/β forest of high-z quasars (McGreer et al. 2011,
2015).
Our model results in a prolonged hydrogen reionization history, extending from xHI ∼ 0.9 at z ∼ 11 to
xHI ∼ 0.1 at z ∼ 6.5. The duration results in part
from the gradually increasing ionization rate ΓHI <
1 × 10−15 s−1 at z > 6.5 associated with radiation emitted by early star-forming galaxies.
For 7 . z . 8, the observational estimates display a
wide range of xHI , from a highly ionized (xHI ∼ 0.8)
to a mostly neutral (xHI ∼ 0.2) IGM. Our model lies
within this range, and at z = 7 our result is in agreement
with the xHI ∼ 0.4 estimates from Greig et al. (2017)
and Yang et al. (2020b) as well as with the xHI ∼ 0.5
estimate from Jung et al. (2020) at z ∼ 7.6.
The redshift at which hydrogen reionization completes
zR , defined as the redshift at which xHI ≤ 1 × 10−3 for
the first time, is z ∼ 6.0 for our best-fit model. After hydrogen reionization completes, our best-fit model
results in an ionization fraction that falls below the es-

22

Villasenor et al.

timate from Fan et al. (2006) (reflected by the lower
optical depth τeff in Figure 12). Nevertheless, our modified model (dashed blue line) shows better consistency
with their estimate.
Later in cosmic history, high energy radiation emitted
by AGNs leads to the ionization of singly ionized helium
(He II). For our best-fit model He II reionization starts
at z ∼ 5 and completes at z ∼ 3.0 when the He II fraction reaches xHeII ≤ 1 × 10−3 for the first time. As the
He II effective optical depth from our model is consistent with the observation from Worseck et al. (2019) for
2.4 . z . 2.9, we argue that the end of He II reionization by z ∼ 2.9 is suggested by their measurement.
Thomson scattering of the CMB by the free electrons
in the IGM provides another diagnostic of the reionization history of the IGM. From the evolution of the
electron density ne given by the ionization state of hydrogen and helium from our models, we can compute
the electron scattering optical depth τe as
Z z
τe (z) =
0

cσT ne (z)
dz
(1 + z)H(z)

(8)

where σT represents the Thomson scattering cross section. Figure 15 shows the electron scattering optical
depth τe from our best-fit model (black line and shaded
region shows the 95% confidence limit). Also shown are
constraints from the Planck satellite (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020) and the recent constraint from de Belsunce et al. (2021). Our result for τe = 0.60 lies within
the upper limit of the τe = 0.0540 ± 0.0074 constraint
from Planck Collaboration et al. (2020) and in good
agreement with the determination of τe = 0.0627+0.0050
−0.0058
from de Belsunce et al. (2021).
3.7. Modified UVB Rates for Matching the Observed
High-Redshift Hydrogen Effective Optical Depth
In §3.4 and §3.5 we discuss how the IGM from our
best-fit model is possibly too highly ionized after hydrogen reionization completes. The hydrogen effective optical depth τeff,H from the model is significantly
lower compared with observations in the redshift range
5 . z . 5.8 (see Figure 12). We can address this issue
by decreasing the H I photoionization rate ΓHI such that
the sharp transition at z ∼ 5.8 from the best-fit model
is replaced by a more gradual increase of ΓHI during the
redshift range 4.8 . z . 6.0 (dashed blue line in Figure
13). This alternative transition in ΓHI was chosen such
that the resulting evolution of H I τeff,H is consistent
with the observations from Bosman et al. (2018).
Assuming that changes made to the photoionization
rate ΓHI correspond to a change of the mean-free-path of
ionizing photons λmfp , then the He Iphotoionization rate

Figure 16. Power spectrum of the Lyman-α transmitted
flux P (k) at z = 5 from our best-fit model (black) and
from our alternative model of the UVB (dashed blue) where
the H I and He I photoionization and photoheating rates are
modified in the redshift range 4.8 . z . 6.1 such that τeff,H is
consistent with the observation from Bosman et al. (2018).
The effect on the power spectrum from the modified model
is to increase P (k) by a roughly constant factor of ∼ 12%
compared with the best-fit model due to the ∼ 6% increase
in the H I opacity at z = 5. Both models are consistent with
the observation from Boera et al. (2019) for k . 0.1 s km−1 .

ΓHeI should also reflect the modification applied to ΓHI .
Correspondingly, we rescale the helium photoionization
rate ΓHeI such that the ratio ΓHI (z)/ΓHeI (z) from the
modified model matches the best-fit model.
Changing λmfp would also affect the photoheating
rates HHI and HHeI . Assuming that the average energy
of the ionizing photons remains the same in the modified model, we rescale the photoheating rates such that
the ratios HHI (z)/ΓHI (z) and HHeI (z)/ΓHeI (z) match
the best-fit model. Results from our modified model
for photoheating and photoionization rates are shown
in Figure 9 as dashed blue lines.
After hydrogen reionization completes at z . 6.0, hydrogen in the IGM is in photoionization equilibrium.
During this epoch, decreasing the H I and He I photoionization rates effectively increases the the neutral fraction
of hydrogen and helium. Consequently the opacity of the
IGM, quantified as the optical depth τeff , also increases
during redshift range. The temperature of the gas in the
IGM is not strongly affected by the modified photoionization and photoheating rates, because, in equilibrium,

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest
the gas temperature T (z) ∝ H(z)/Γ(z) and this ratio is
unchanged from the best-fit model.
The modified model only changes the photoionization
and photoheating rates during the redshift range 4.8 ≤
z ≤ 6.1. These changes result in an increase of τeff,H during 4.8 ≤ z ≤ 5.8 and a decrease during 5.8 < z ≤ 6.1
but do not strongly affect the evolution of the gas temperature. For redshifts z < 4.8, the ionization fraction
of hydrogen in the IGM in photoionization equilibrium
is determined by the ratio of the photoionization rate
to the recombination rate xHII (z) ∝ ΓHI (z)/αHII (z, T ).
Since the thermal evolution resulting from the modified
and best-fit models are very similar and the rates Γ and
H at z < 4.8 are the same. Thereby, the evolution of the
neutral fraction xHI , the effective optical depth τeff,H ,
and the Lyman-α power spectrum P (k) resulting from
the modified model is nearly unchanged from the best-fit
model at redshifts z < 4.8.
The increase in the hydrogen effective optical depth
τeff,H during the redshift range 4.8 ≤ z ≤ 5.8 in the
modified model influences the Lyman-α power spectrum
at this epoch. Given the available data, this modification only affects comparisons with the observed P (k)
at z = 5.0. Figure 16 shows P (k) from the modified
(dashed blue) and best-fit model (black) at z = 5. Relative to the best-fit model, using the modified model
results in a small increase (∼ 12%) in P (k) owing to the
small increase (∼ 6%) in τeff,H . Either model shows
consistency with the observational P (k) measurement
from Boera et al. (2019).
3.8. Limitations of the Model
For this work, we have modeled the evolution of
the properties of the IGM using a spatially homogeneous ionizing background. Simulations of a more realistic, spatially inhomogeneous hydrogen reionization
process show that spatial fluctuations in the temperature–density relation of the post-reionization IGM have
a minor effect on the flux power spectrum (Keating et al.
2018) at z ≤ 5 while the inhomogeneous UVB allows
large islands of neutral hydrogen to persist up to redshift z ≤ 5.5 and can reproduce the observed distribution of Lyman-α opacity (Kulkarni et al. 2019). Similarly, radiative transfers simulations of He II reionization
show that the fluctuations in the ionization state of helium have a minor effect on observations of the hydrogen
Lyman-α forest (La Plante et al. 2017; Upton Sanderbeck & Bird 2020). Not including the impact of galactic
winds or AGN-feedback on the forest is a conservative
approach for simulations aimed at constraining effects
that suppress small-scale power. AGN feedback in the
form of heating or mass redistribution from small to

23

large scales is also expected to suppress the 1D power
spectrum on large scales, and to have an increased effect
at low redshifts (Viel et al. 2013b). Ignoring the impact
of AGN feedback may lead to a few percent bias in the
determination of cosmological and astrophysical parameters (Chabanier et al. 2020). This model uncertainty is
comparable to the statistical uncertainties of the eBOSS
data used in this work.
Another limitation of our method results from the
UVB photoionization and photoheating rates used for
our simulation grid being constructed from simple transformations of a template set of rates. We therefore do
not probe the full range of ionization and thermal histories that could be allowed by the observations of the
Lyman-α forest. However, our model produces statistical properties of the Lyman-α forest that agree with
a wide range of observations and a thermal evolution
of the IGM consistent with previous inferences. These
features of our work represent a significant achievement
enabled by the ability to explore a wide range of models for the UVB from self-consistently evolved simulations. We emphasize that with our computational capabilities, performing a very large number of simulations
(e.g., thousands) is now a possibility. We therefore defer
more flexible explorations of models for the heating and
ionization from the UVB to future work.
In the approach used for this work, we modify the photoionization and photoheating jointly. This joint variation results in another important limitation of our study.
The large scales of the power spectrum of the forest are
sensitive to the ionization state of H I which, in equilibrium, is set by the balance between photoionization
and recombination. The large-scales of P (k) depend on
the temperature of the gas through the recombination
coefficient α(T ) ∝ T −0.72 but are mostly determined
by the intensity of the photoionization rate ΓHI . Since
a large fraction of the dataset used for our inference
probes the large-scale P (k) the best-fit photoheating
rates are influenced by the determination of the best-fit
photoionization rates. We have shown that the photoheating from our best-fit model is consistent with other
estimates of the thermal state of the IGM determined
independently. Nevertheless, the relatively small uncertainty in the thermal state parameters T0 and γ from
this work is in part a consequence of the of the wellconstrained determination of the photoionization rate
from the large-scale P (k). In future work we will explore
a more flexible approach in which the photoheating has
some degree of freedom with respect to the photoionization rate, such as using density-dependent UVB rates to
better model a inhomogeneous reionization.

24

Villasenor et al.
4. SUMMARY

With the objective of finding a photoionization and
photoheating history that results in properties of the
IGM consistent with observations of the hydrogen and
helium Lyman-α forest, we have used the GPU-native
Cholla code to perform an unprecedented grid of more
than 400 cosmological simulations spanning a variety
of ionization and thermal histories of the IGM. These
calculations extend our CHIPS suite of hydrodynamical
simulations initially presented in Villasenor et al. (2021).
We compare the properties of the Lyman-α forest from
our simulations to several observational measurements
to determine via a likelihood analysis the best-fit model
for the photoionization and photoheating rates. From
our best-fit model we have inferred the thermal history
of the IGM, and demonstrate consistency with recent
estimates obtained from the properties of the Lyman-α
forest. A summary of the efforts and conclusions from
this work follows.

any need to rescale the optical depth from the simulations in post-processing to match the observed
mean transmission of the forest, which is a common shortcoming of previous analyses.
• Our approach does not require an assumption of
a power-law relation for the density-temperature
distribution of the gas, as the Lyman-α spectra
is constructed from our self-consistently evolved
simulations. We find that a single power law does
not accurately describe the ρgas −T distribution of
the gas in the density range relevant to generating
the signal of the Lyman-α forest.

• The CHIPS simulations self-consistently evolve a
wide range of ionization and thermal histories
of the IGM. We compare the properties of the
Lyman-α forest in the form of the power spectrum P (k) of the hydrogen Lyman-α transmitted
flux and the helium (He II) effective optical depth
τeff,HeII from our simulations to several observational measurements covering the redshift range
2.2 ≤ z ≤ 5.0 for P (k) (Iršič et al. 2017b; Boera
et al. 2019; Chabanier et al. 2019) and 2.4 . z .
2.9 for τeff,HeII (Worseck et al. 2016).

• From our analysis, we infer the evolution of the
thermal state of the IGM. The temperature history of the IGM shows a first temperature peak
(T0 ' 1.3 × 104 K) due to hydrogen reionization at
z ' 6. This peak is followed by an epoch of cooling due to adiabatic expansion of the Universe until the onset of helium reionization from radiation
emitted by AGNs. The ionization of helium leads
to a second increase of the temperature until He II
is fully ionized (z ' 3), resulting in a second peak
of T0 ' 1.4×104 K. The second peak is followed by
a second period of cooling from cosmic expansion.
Our result is consistent with previous estimates
from Gaikwad et al. (2020b) and Gaikwad et al.
(2020a). We note that the method employed in
this work where we modify the UVB photoionization and photoheating rates by rescaling and shifting the model from Puchwein et al. (2019) limits
the variation on the evolution of the thermal history of the IGM in our simulations. In future work
we will allow for more flexibility in the photoheating history which will result in a more complete
sample of the IGM density-temperature distribution. The improved flexibility of the models may
permit a better inference of the thermal history
of the IGM, as for now our low-redshift (z < 4)
constraints are largely informed by the ionization
state of hydrogen which likely results in a underestimated uncertainty in our T0 − γ evolution.

• We perform a Bayesian MCMC marginalization
to determine the best-fit UVB model. The performance of each model in reproducing the observations is evaluated over the entire redshift evolution instead of comparing for each redshift bin
independently. Additionally, our simulation grid
naturally probes a large range of ionization histories that we match directly to evolution of the
ionization state of hydrogen encoded in the power
spectrum of the Lyman-α forest. We thereby avoid

• We compare the evolution of the hydrogen effective optical depth τeff,H from our best-fit model to
several observational determinations. We find that
after hydrogen reionization completes (5 . z . 6),
the H I effective optical depth resulting from the
model may underestimate the observations. We
provide a modification to our best-fit model where
the photoionization and photoheating rates are reduced during this epoch such that the evolution of
τeff,H is consistent with measurements by Bosman

• We present a direct extension of the CHIPS suite
(Villasenor et al. 2021) consisting of a grid of 400
simulations (L = 50 h−1 Mpc, N = 10243 ) that
vary the spatially-uniform photoionization and
photoheating rates from the metagalactic UVB.
The UVB rates applied for our grid use the Puchwein et al. (2019) model as a template, and use
four parameters that control a rescaling of the amplitude and redshift-timing of the hydrogen and
helium photoionization and photoheating rates.

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest
et al. (2018). Additionally, the neutral fraction of
hydrogen from the modified model shows consistency with the measurements by Fan et al. (2006)
during this redshift interval.
• The model for the photoionization and photoheating rates from the UVB obtained from our analysis shows consistency with the observations of the
Lyman-α power spectrum and the effective optical
depth from both hydrogen and helium (He II), the
optical depth from the CMB probed by Planck
Collaboration et al. (2020), and previous inferences of the thermal state of the IGM. This model
can be applied in future cosmological simulations
that aim to reproduce properties of the IGM consistent with the observed Lyman-α forest.
Our work shows that an exploration of the IGM properties from hundreds of self-consistently evolved models
for the astrophysical processes that impact the gas in
the medium is now possible by exploiting modern computational techniques on the world’s largest supercomputers. Using our efficient GPU-based code Cholla with
Summit, we are able to run hundreds of cosmological
simulations in just a few days using a small fraction of
the system. We anticipate that when combined with
the exquisite picture of the Lyman-α forest that experiments like DESI Collaboration et al. (2016) will
provide, this capability will revolutionize future studies of the properties of the IGM. We can leverage nextgeneration exascale systems and simulate large volumes

25

(L ∼ 50h−1Mpc) at high resolution (N = 20483 ) for
thousands of models describing the various the astrophysical processes that affect the IGM with a range of
cosmological parameters, and study different models for
the nature of dark matter and the mass hierarchy of neutrinos based on their impact on the small-scale power
spectrum of the Lyman-α forest.
Software: Cholla (Schneider & Robertson 2015,
https://github.com/cholla-hydro/cholla), Python (van
Rossum 1995), Numpy (Van Der Walt et al. 2011), Matplotlib (Hunter 2007), MUSIC (Hahn & Abel 2011),
GRACKLE (Smith et al. 2017).
This research used resources of the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility at the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, which is supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract DE-AC05-00OR22725, using Summit allocations
CSC434 and AST169. An award of computer time
was provided by the INCITE program, via project
AST175. We acknowledge use of the lux supercomputer at UC Santa Cruz, funded by NSF MRI grant
AST1828315, and support from NASA TCAN grant
80NSSC21K0271. B.V. is supported in part by the
UC MEXUS-CONACyT doctoral fellowship. B.E.R. acknowledges support from NASA contract NNG16PJ25C
and grants 80NSSC18K0563 and 80NSSC22K0814. We
acknowledge the comments and suggestions received
from the anonymous referee which helped improve the
content and clarity of this work.

APPENDIX
A. RESOLUTION CONVERGENCE ANALYSIS

To assess the possible impact of the simulation spatial resolution on our results, we compare the Lyman-α transmitted
flux power spectrum measured from simulations with different resolutions. Each run was performed using the same
box size (L = 50h−1 cMpc) for identical cosmological parameters (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020) and our best-fit
determination for the photoionization and photoheating rates, and differ only in their grid resolution. Our comparison
is made between three runs with resolutions N = 5123 , N = 10243 , and N = 20483 cells and dark matter particles,
with comoving spatial resolutions of ∆x ' 98, 49, and 24 h−1 kpc, respectively. The initial conditions for the runs
were generated to preserve common large-scale modes, such that the results from the simulations could be compared
directly over shared spatial scales.
Figure 17 shows the power spectrum of the Lyman-α flux measured for our three simulations at redshifts z =2, 3,
4, and 5. As shown, the structure of the Lyman-α forest becomes better resolved as the number of cells increase.
The lower panels present the fractional difference ∆P (k)/P (k) of the power spectrum measured from the N = 5123
and N = 10243 simulations compared with the N = 20483 simulation on overlapping spatial scales. Our comparison
shows that the effect of the decreased resolution is to increase the power on large scales (k . 0.02 s km−1 ) while the
small-scale power is suppressed. For the low-resolution simulation (N = 5123 ) the differences are significant, and on
large scales the power spectrum is overestimated by ∼ 50% at redshift z = 5. As the redshift decreases the differences
also decrease to ∼ 13% by z = 2. On small scales, the power spectrum is suppressed by 20 − 60%.
Our fiducial resolution for the CHIPS simulations was N = 10243 . At this resolution we measure only small
differences in the Lyman-α structure compared with the N = 20483 simulation, as on large spatial scales the power

26

Villasenor et al.

Figure 17. Power spectrum of the Lyman-α transmitted flux P (k) measured from simulations with different comoving spatial
resolutions of ∆x ' 98, 49, and 24 h−1 kpc. The three simulations model a L = 50h−1Mpc box with the Planck Collaboration
et al. (2020) cosmology and apply our best-fit determination for the photoionization and photoheating rates. The bottom panels
show the fractional difference in the power spectrum ∆P (k)/P (k) between the N = 5123 and N = 10243 runs and the N = 20483
simulation. Low-resolution simulations show increased power on large scales (k . 0.03 s km−1 ) and suppressed structure in the
small scales relative to higher resolution simulations. For the intermediate-resolution simulation N = 10243 , which corresponds
to our fiducial CHIPS grid resolution, the differences in P (k) with respect to the N = 20483 simulation are . 7% on the large
scales and . 10 − 25% on the small scales. We account for this resolution effect during our inference procedure by adding a
systematic error to the observational measurements of P (k) in the form of σres = ∆P (k, z), where ∆P (k, z) is the redshift- and
scale-dependent difference in the power spectrum measured from the N = 10243 run compared with the N = 20483 simulation.

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest

27

Figure 18. Consequences of rescaling the effective optical depth for the power spectrum of the Lyman-α transmitted flux at
redshifts z =2, 3, 4, and 5. Shown is the fractional difference ∆P (k)/P (k) after rescaling the optical depth along the skewer
sample from our simulations by a constant factor such that τ]
eff,H = (1 + α)τeff for α in the range [-3, 3]. Rescaling the optical
depth along the skewers such that τeff,H increases (decreases) has the effect of increasing (decreasing) P (k). On scales in the
range 0.002 . k . 0.1 s km−1 the change induced on P (k) is almost uniform, while for the smallest scales k & 0.1 s km−1 the
effect is redshift- and scale-dependent.

spectrum is overestimated by . 7%, and for small scales (0.03 . k . 0.2 s km−1 ) we measure a suppression on P (k)
of . 10 − 25%. To account for the effect of resolution on simulations used to constrain the UVB model, we include a
systematic uncertainty of the form σres = ∆P (k, z), where ∆P (k, z) is the redshift- and scale-dependent difference in
the power spectrum measured between the N = 10243 and N = 20483 simulations.

B. EFFECT OF RESCALING THE H I EFFECTIVE OPTICAL DEPTH ON THE LYMAN-α FLUX POWER

SPECTRUM
The power spectrum of the Lyman-α transmitted flux P (k) is computed from flux fluctuations δF = (F − hF i)/hF i.
The power spectrum is sensitive to changes on the ionization state of hydrogen in the IGM, which in turn changes the
effective optical depth τeff,H and the mean transmitted flux hF i = exp(−τeff ). To estimate how changes in the overall
ionization state of the IGM affect the power spectrum of the Lyman-α flux, we can rescale the optical depth of the
simulated skewers and re-measure P (k). We rescale by a constant factor tuned such that the effective optical depth
measured from the rescaled skewers follows τ]
eff,H = (1 + α)τeff,H , where τeff,H is the original effective optical depth
obtained from the simulated skewers. From the rescaled skewers, we compute the corresponding fluctuations of the
f
e
e
e
e
transmitted flux δf
F = (F − hF i)/hF i, where hF i = exp(−τ]
eff,H ). Finally, from δF we compute the mean flux power
e
spectrum P (k) for the rescaled sample.
Figure 18 shows the fractional difference of the flux power spectrum ∆P (k)/P (k) = Pe(k)/P (k)−1 measured between
the rescaled skewers and the original sample for several values in the range α ∈ [−0.3, 0.3]. Because of the non-linear
relation between the optical depth τ and the transmitted flux F = exp(−τ ), rescaling the effective optical depth
τeff,H in the skewer sample to higher values α > 0 has the effect of increasing the overall normalization of P (k) on
most of the scales relevant for this work, namely 0.002 . k . 0.1 s km−1 . On a similar way, decreasing τeff,H decreases
the normalization of P (k) at these scales. For smaller scales k > 0.1 s km−1 the effects are redshift dependent and

28

Villasenor et al.

Figure 19.
Normalized covariance matrix of the Lyman-α transmitted flux power spectrum at z = 4.6 measured from
simulations that vary the parameters βH (top panels) and ∆zH (bottom panels) independently. The structure of the covariance
is maintained across the simulations. Decreasing the parameter βH increases the normalization of P (k) and its covariance on
roughly all scales. We measure small elementwise differences < 0.1 in the normalized covariance across simulations with different
βH . The effect of changing ∆zH is minimal with elementwise differences < 0.03.

Figure 20.
Normalized covariance matrix of the Lyman-α transmitted flux power spectrum at z = 3.0 measured from
simulations that vary the parameters βHe (top panels) and ∆zHe (bottom panels) independently. The structure of the covariance
is maintained across the simulations. Changes in βHe and ∆zHe cause small variation in the normalized covariance matrix, we
measure only small elementwise differences < 0.05 over these simulations.

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest

29

Figure 21. Evolution of the IGM temperature T0 (left panel) from models of the UVB where the H I and He I photoheating
rates have been reduced in the interval 4.2 ≤ z ≤ 6.2 relative to our best-fit model (center and right panel). The fractional
differences of T0 and the heating rates HHI and HHeI with respect to the best-fit model are shown in the bottom panels. The
reduced photoheating rates decrease T0 for z < 6.2 but the change is most significant for 3.5 . z . 6.0. At z . 3.5 the impact
on T0 is minimal as heating from He II reionization dominates. A reduction of ∼ 80% in the photoheating rates at z ∼ 6.0
causes a decrease in T0 of ∼ 20% at z ∼ 5.0. For z . 3.5 the reduced photoheating has a minimal impact on T0 of . 5%.

we find that increasing (decreasing) τeff,H tends to also increase (decrease) P (k) for z & 3.5, while it has the opposite
effect for z . 3.5 as P (k) decreases (increases) when τeff,H is increased (decreased).
This study shows that the Lyman-α power spectrum itself is sensitive to the hydrogen effective optical depth, and for
this reason we do not include the observational measurements of τeff,H for our inference of the UVB model presented
in this work.
C. COVARIANCE MATRICES OF THE TRANSMITTED FLUX POWER SPECTRUM FROM THE

SIMULATIONS
In Section 2.9 we present the likelihood function employed for our MCMC analysis (Eq. 5). When comparing the
power spectrum of the Lyman-α transmitted flux from the simulations to the observational measurements we employ
the covariance matrices of P (k) reported by the observational works (Chabanier et al. 2019; Iršič et al. 2017b; Boera
et al. 2019). In this section, we quantify the effect on the covariance of the simulated P (k) from variations in our
model parameters.
Figure 19 shows the normalized covariance of P (k) at z = 4.6 for simulations with different values for the parameters
βH (top panels) and ∆zH (bottom panels). Decreasing the parameter βH increases the Lyman-α opacity of the IGM,
which increases the normalization of P (k) (see §B). The increase of P (k) also increases its covariance on roughly
all scales. We measure small elementwise differences < 0.1 in the normalized covariance matrices across simulations
that vary βH , while for simulations with different ∆zH the impact is minimal and results in only < 0.03 elementwise
differences. Figure 20 presents the covariance matrix of P (k) at z = 3.0 for simulations that vary the parameters βHe
(top panels) and ∆zHe (bottom panels). Here we also measure the impact to be small with differences < 0.05.
D.

COLDER MID-REDSHIFT IGM FROM REDUCED PHOTOHEATING

In §3.3 we discuss how our best-fit model results in a warmer IGM compared to the estimates from Boera et al.
(2019) during the interval 4.2 . z . 5.0 as the temperature T0 from our model is ∼ 1σ higher compared to their result.
We explore scenarios where the mid-redshift IGM is cooled relative to our best-fit model by decreasing the H I and
He I photoheating rates in the redshift range 4.2 . z . 6.2. The modified photoheating rates are shown in Figure 21
(middle and center panels) along with the fractional differences relative to the best-fit model shown in the respective
bottom panels. To compute the history of T0 for the reduced photoheating models, we integrate the evolution of the
temperature of a single-cell at ρgas = ρ̄ following the method from Hui & Gnedin (1997) (see Section 2 of their work
for a detailed description). The resulting evolution of T0 for the different models is presented in the left panel of Figure
21. We show that reducing the H I and He I photoheating rates by ∼ 80% at z ∼ 6 results in a colder IGM where T0
is reduced by ∼ 20% at z ∼ 5 such that T0 ∼ 8 × 103 K for 4.2 . z . 5.0 agrees well with the estimate from Boera

30

Villasenor et al.

et al. (2019). However, we find that for such a scenario T0 at z ∼ 5.4 is lower than the inference from Gaikwad et al.
(2020b). This conflict exhibits some degree of tension between the estimates at z ∼ 5.0 and z ∼ 5.4 from Boera et al.
(2019) and Gaikwad et al. (2020b) respectively.
The photoheating H and the photoionization Γ rate from the UVB are given by the intensity of the background
radiation J(ν, z) as
Z ∞
Z ∞
4πJ(ν, z)
4πJ(ν, z)
Γ(z) =
σ(ν)dν,
H(z) =
(hν − hν0 ) σ(ν)dν
(D1)
hν
hν
ν0
ν0
where ν0 and σ(ν) are the threshold frequency and photoionization cross-section, respectively. Consider power-law
models for the cross-section and the intensity of the radiation at wavelengths λ > 912 Å, which can be written as
σ(ν) = σ0 (ν/ν0 )φ and J(ν) = (ν/ν0 )α , with indices φ < 0 and α < 0. Physically, reducing the photoheating
rate relative to the photoionization rate can be achieved by changing the spectral index of the ionizing radiation
α. By solving the integrals in Eqs D1 assuming these power-law models and evaluating the fractional change in the
photoionization ∆Γ/Γ and photoheating ∆H/H for a change in the spectral index ∆α, we find the following relation
is satisfied
∆Γ
− ∆H
H
∆α = (1 + α + φ) Γ ∆H
1+ H

(D2)

Equation D2 relates the change of the spectral index of the radiation necessary to produce some variation of the
photoionization and photoheating from a given UVB model. By applying Eq. D2, we can modify the photoheating
relative to the photoionization of a UVB model within a physically-plausible range for the index α. In future work, we
will explore which variations in the IGM temperature T0 from changes of the photoheating rate match the observed
hydrogen effective optical depth at z > 5 while using physically-plausible source populations.
E.

ACCURACY OF THE POWER-LAW FIT TO THE DENSITY-TEMPERATURE DISTRIBUTION OF THE
GAS IN OUR SIMULATIONS.

A common method to infer the thermal state of the IGM from observations of the Lyman-α forest involves marginalizγ−1
ing over the thermal properties T0 and γ in the approximate power-law density-temperature relation T = T0 (ρgas /ρ̄)
(Bolton et al. 2014; Nasir et al. 2016; Hiss et al. 2018; Boera et al. 2019; Walther et al. 2019; Gaikwad et al.
2020a). The density of the IGM gas that contributes to the majority of the Lyman-α forest signal lies in the
range −1 ≤ log10 (ρgas /ρ̄) ≤ 1. From our simulations we find that a single power law fails to reproduce the densitytemperature distribution of the gas over this density interval. The left panels of Figure 22 show the density-temperature
distribution of the gas in one of our simulations and the corresponding power-law fit to the distribution over the density
range −1 ≤ log10 (ρgas /ρ̄) ≤ 1 at redshift z = 3 (top) and z = 4 (bottom). The deviations of the gas temperature in
the simulation relative to the power-law fits are presented in the right panels, showing that the fractional differences
∆T /T from the density-temperature distribution in the simulation with respect to the power-law fit can be as large
as ∼ 15%.
REFERENCES
Becker, G. D., & Bolton, J. S. 2013, MNRAS, 436, 1023
Becker, G. D., D’Aloisio, A., Christenson, H. M., et al.
2021, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2103.16610
Becker, G. D., Hewett, P. C., Worseck, G., & Prochaska,
J. X. 2013, MNRAS, 430, 2067
Becker, R. H., Fan, X., White, R. L., et al. 2001, AJ, 122,
2850
Bird, S., Rogers, K. K., Peiris, H. V., et al. 2019, JCAP,
2019, 050
Boera, E., Becker, G. D., Bolton, J. S., & Nasir, F. 2019,
ApJ, 872, 101

Bolton, J. S., Becker, G. D., Haehnelt, M. G., & Viel, M.
2014, MNRAS, 438, 2499
Bond, J. R., Kofman, L., & Pogosyan, D. 1996, Nature,
380, 603
Bosman, S. E. I., Fan, X., Jiang, L., et al. 2018, MNRAS,
479, 1055
Calverley, A. P., Becker, G. D., Haehnelt, M. G., & Bolton,
J. S. 2011, MNRAS, 412, 2543
Cen, R., Miralda-Escudé, J., Ostriker, J. P., & Rauch, M.
1994, ApJL, 437, L9

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest

31

Figure 22. Density-temperature distribution of the IGM gas (left column) from one of our simulations at redshift z = 3 (top)
and z = 4 (bottom). A power law fit of the form T = T0 (ρgas /ρ̄)γ−1 over the range −1 ≤ log10 (ρgas /ρ̄) ≤ 1 is shown (black
dashed lines). The right columns shows deviations of the density-temperature distribution with respect to the power-law fit
over the fitted range. The blue region corresponds to the 68% highest probability interval for the temperature as function of the
overdensity ρgas /ρ̄. The differences between the distribution of the gas relative to the power-law fit can be as large as ∼ 15%.
Chabanier, S., Bournaud, F., Dubois, Y., et al. 2020,
MNRAS, 495, 1825
Chabanier, S., Palanque-Delabrouille, N., Yèche, C., et al.
2019, JCAP, 2019, 017

D’Aloisio, A., McQuinn, M., Davies, F. B., & Furlanetto,
S. R. 2018, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 473, 560
Davies, F. B., Hennawi, J. F., Bañados, E., et al. 2018,
Astrophysical Journal, 864, 142

Colella, P., & Woodward, P. R. 1984, Journal of
Computational Physics, 54, 174
Croft, R. A. C., Weinberg, D. H., Katz, N., & Hernquist, L.
1998, ApJ, 495, 44

de Belsunce, R., Gratton, S., Coulton, W., & Efstathiou, G.
2021, MNRAS, 507, 1072
DESI Collaboration, Aghamousa, A., Aguilar, J., et al.
2016, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1611.00036

32

Villasenor et al.

Eilers, A.-C., Davies, F. B., & Hennawi, J. F. 2018, ApJ,
864, 53

McGreer, I. D., Mesinger, A., & Fan, X. 2011, MNRAS,
415, 3237

Fan, X., Strauss, M. A., Becker, R. H., et al. 2006, AJ, 132,
117

McQuinn, M. 2016, ARA&A, 54, 313

Faucher-Giguère, C.-A. 2020, MNRAS, 493, 1614

Miralda-Escudé, J., & Rees, M. J. 1994, MNRAS, 266, 343

Gaikwad, P., Khaire, V., Choudhury, T. R., & Srianand, R.
2017, MNRAS, 466, 838

Nasir, F., Bolton, J. S., & Becker, G. D. 2016, MNRAS,
463, 2335

Gaikwad, P., Srianand, R., Haehnelt, M. G., & Choudhury,
T. R. 2020a, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2009.00016

Oñorbe, J., Hennawi, J. F., & Lukić, Z. 2017, ApJ, 837, 106

Meiksin, A. A. 2009, Reviews of Modern Physics, 81, 1405

Gallego, S. G., Cantalupo, S., Sarpas, S., et al. 2021,
MNRAS, 504, 16

Pieri, M. M., Bonoli, S., Chaves-Montero, J., et al. 2016, in
SF2A-2016: Proceedings of the Annual meeting of the
French Society of Astronomy and Astrophysics, ed.
C. Reylé, J. Richard, L. Cambrésy, M. Deleuil,
E. Pécontal, L. Tresse, & I. Vauglin, 259–266

Greig, B., Mesinger, A., & Bañados, E. 2019, MNRAS, 484,
5094

Planck Collaboration, Aghanim, N., Akrami, Y., et al.
2020, A&A, 641, A6

Greig, B., Mesinger, A., Haiman, Z., & Simcoe, R. A. 2017,
MNRAS, 466, 4239

Puchwein, E., Bolton, J. S., Haehnelt, M. G., et al. 2015,
MNRAS, 450, 4081

Haardt, F., & Madau, P. 2012, ApJ, 746, 125
Hahn, O., & Abel, T. 2011, MNRAS, 415, 2101

Puchwein, E., Haardt, F., Haehnelt, M. G., & Madau, P.
2019, MNRAS, 485, 47

Hernquist, L., Katz, N., Weinberg, D. H., &
Miralda-Escudé, J. 1996, ApJL, 457, L51

Qin, Y., Mesinger, A., Bosman, S. E. I., & Viel, M. 2021,
MNRAS, 506, 2390

Hiss, H., Walther, M., Hennawi, J. F., et al. 2018, The
Astrophysical Journal, 865, 42

Robertson, B. E., Ellis, R. S., Furlanetto, S. R., & Dunlop,
J. S. 2015, ApJL, 802, L19

Ho, M.-F., Bird, S., & Shelton, C. R. 2022, MNRAS, 509,
2551

Schneider, E. E., & Robertson, B. E. 2015, ApJS, 217, 24

Gaikwad, P., Rauch, M., Haehnelt, M. G., et al. 2020b,
MNRAS, 494, 5091

Hoag, A., Bradač, M., Huang, K., et al. 2019, ApJ, 878, 12
Hui, L., & Gnedin, N. Y. 1997, MNRAS, 292, 27
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science & Engineering, 9,
90

Slosar, A., Font-Ribera, A., Pieri, M. M., et al. 2011,
JCAP, 2011, 001
Smith, B. D., Bryan, G. L., Glover, S. C. O., et al. 2017,
MNRAS, 466, 2217
Upton Sanderbeck, P., & Bird, S. 2020, MNRAS, 496, 4372

Iršič, V., Viel, M., Haehnelt, M. G., et al. 2017a, PhRvD,
96, 023522

Upton Sanderbeck, P. R., D’Aloisio, A., & McQuinn, M. J.
2016, MNRAS, 460, 1885

Iršič, V., Viel, M., Berg, T. A. M., et al. 2017b, MNRAS,
466, 4332

Van Der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. 2011,
Computing in Science & Engineering, 13, 22

Jung, I., Finkelstein, S. L., Dickinson, M., et al. 2020, ApJ,
904, 144

van Rossum, G. 1995, Python tutorial, Tech. Rep.
CS-R9526, Centrum voor Wiskunde en Informatica
(CWI), Amsterdam

Keating, L. C., Puchwein, E., & Haehnelt, M. G. 2018,
MNRAS, 477, 5501
Khaire, V., & Srianand, R. 2019, MNRAS, 484, 4174

Viel, M., Becker, G. D., Bolton, J. S., & Haehnelt, M. G.
2013a, PhRvD, 88, 043502

Kulkarni, G., Keating, L. C., Haehnelt, M. G., et al. 2019,
MNRAS, 485, L24

Viel, M., Schaye, J., & Booth, C. M. 2013b, MNRAS, 429,
1734

La Plante, P., Trac, H., Croft, R., & Cen, R. 2017, ApJ,
841, 87

Villasenor, B., Robertson, B., Madau, P., & Schneider, E.
2021, ApJ, 912, 138

Madau, P., & Haardt, F. 2015, ApJL, 813, L8

Walther, M., Armengaud, E., Ravoux, C., et al. 2021,
JCAP, 2021, 059

Mason, C. A., Treu, T., Dijkstra, M., et al. 2018, ApJ, 856,
2
Mason, C. A., Fontana, A., Treu, T., et al. 2019, MNRAS,
485, 3947
McGreer, I. D., Mesinger, A., & D’Odorico, V. 2015,
MNRAS, 447, 499

Walther, M., Hennawi, J. F., Hiss, H., et al. 2018, ApJ,
852, 22
Walther, M., Oñorbe, J., Hennawi, J. F., & Lukić, Z. 2019,
ApJ, 872, 13
Wang, F., Davies, F. B., Yang, J., et al. 2020, ApJ, 896, 23

The Thermal History of the IGM from the H I and He II Lyman-α Forest
Wolfson, M., Hennawi, J. F., Davies, F. B., et al. 2021,
MNRAS, 508, 5493
Worseck, G., Davies, F. B., Hennawi, J. F., & Prochaska,
J. X. 2019, ApJ, 875, 111

33

Worseck, G., Prochaska, J. X., Hennawi, J. F., & McQuinn,
M. 2016, ApJ, 825, 144
Wyithe, J. S. B., & Bolton, J. S. 2011, MNRAS, 412, 1926
Yang, J., Wang, F., Fan, X., et al. 2020a, ApJ, 904, 26
—. 2020b, ApJL, 897, L14

