                                       Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 000–000 (0000)     Printed 11 October 2018    (MN LATEX style file v1.4)




                                       Equation of State of the Photoionized Intergalactic
                                       Medium

                                       Lam Hui and Nickolay Y. Gnedin
                                       1 NASA/Fermilab Astrophysics Center, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, IL 60510
arXiv:astro-ph/9612232v1 26 Dec 1996




                                       2 Department of Astronomy, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720




                                       11 October 2018



                                                                        ABSTRACT
                                                                        We develop an efficient method to study the effects of reionization history on
                                                                        the temperature-density relation of the intergalactic medium in the low den-
                                                                        sity limit (overdensity δ <
                                                                                                  ∼ 5). It is applied to the study of photo-reionization

                                                                        models in which the amplitude, spectrum and onset epoch of the ionizing flux,
                                                                        as well as the cosmology, are systematically varied. We find that the mean
                                                                        temperature-density relation at z = 2 − 4 is well approximated by a power-
                                                                        law equation of state for uniform reionization models. We derive analytical
                                                                        expressions for its evolution and exhibit its asymptotic behavior: it is found
                                                                        that for sufficiently early reionization, imprints of reionization history prior
                                                                        to z ∼ 10 on the temperature-density relation are washed out. In this limit
                                                                                                                                        √
                                                                        the temperature at cosmic mean density is proportional to [Ωb h/ Ω0 ]1/1.7 .
                                                                        While the amplitude of the radiation flux at the ionizing frequency of H i is
                                                                        found to have a negligible effect on the temperature-density relation as long
                                                                        as the universe reionizes before z ∼ 5, the spectrum can change the overall
                                                                        temperature by about 20%, through variations in the abundances of helium
                                                                        species. However the slope of the mean equation of state is found to lie within
                                                                        a narrow range for all reionization models we study, where reionization takes
                                                                        place before z ∼ 5. We discuss the implications of these findings for the ob-
                                                                        servational properties of the Lyα forest. In particular, uncertainties in the
                                                                        temperature of the intergalactic medium, due to the uncertain reionization
                                                                        history of our universe, introduces a 30% scaling in the amplitude of the col-
                                                                        umn density distribution while the the slope of the distribution is only affected
                                                                        by about 5%. Finally, we discuss how a fluctuating ionizing field affects the
                                                                        above results. We argue that under certain conditions, the loss of memory


                                       c 0000 RAS
2    Hui and Gnedin
                             of reionization history implies that at late times, the temperature-density re-
                             lation of a gas in a fluctuating ionizing background can be approximated by
                             one that results from a uniform radiation field, provided the universe reionizes
                             sufficiently early.

                             Key words: cosmology: theory — intergalactic medium — quasars: absorp-
                             tion lines



1   INTRODUCTION

Absorption line studies of the low column density Lyα forest (NH i <      −2
                                                                   ∼ 15 cm ; see Hu et al.

1995; Lu et al. 1996; Cristiani et al. 1996) offer a unique probe of the universe which is
free of luminosity bias, spans a wide redshift range z ∼ 2 − 4 and where the overdensity is
mildly nonlinear (overdensity δ <
                                ∼ 5, see Hui, Gnedin & Zhang 1996) and hence the relevant

physics is simple to understand. Recent hydrodynamic simulations support the hypothesis
that the Lyα forest arises from a fluctuating intergalactic medium which is the natural result
of gravitational instability in hierarchical clustering cosmological models (Cen et al. 1994;
Zhang et al. 1995; Hernquist et al. 1996; Miralda-Escudé et al. 1996; Wadsley & Bond 1996).
    The main quantity of interest in such studies is the Lyα transmission (or optical depth) as
a function of frequency, which is determined by the density of neutral hydrogen as a function
of position. The Gunn-Peterson effect (Gunn & Peterson 1965) tells us that hydrogen (as
well as helium) is highly ionized for z <
                                        ∼ 5. Several models for its origin have been studied:

photoionization by first generation of stars or quasars, collisional ionization induced by
shock-heated gas, decaying neutrinos and so on (Ikeuchi & Ostriker 1986; Couchman &
Rees 1986; Sciama 1990; Miralda-Escudé & Ostriker 1992; Shapiro, Giroux, & Babul 1994;
Giroux & Shapiro 1996; Haiman & Loeb 1996). The reader is also referred to Shapiro (1995)
for an excellent review on the subject. We focus on photoionization models in this paper
although the semi-analytical method we propose in this paper can be applied to any model.
    Ionization equilibrium, which should hold after the universe reionizes, dictates that the
neutral hydrogen density is approximately proportional to ρ2b T −0.7 where ρb is the baryon
density and T is the temperature (see § 3.1.1). It is therefore important to know the am-
plitude of T and its dependence on ρb . As we will discuss later, the temperature-density
relation can significantly affect observed properties of the Lyα forest, its column density
distribution for instance.
    Imagine a fluid element evolving in a photoionized intergalactic medium. Its temperature
                                                                            c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
                                                            Equation of State of the IGM      3
at z ∼ 2 − 4 is influenced by a number of factors: how its density evolves with time, which
determines the amount of heating/cooling; how and when the ionizing radiation is turned on;
the radiation amplitude and spectrum, which control how much photoionization heating the
fluid element suffers; cosmological parameters such as baryon density, the Hubble constant
and the density parameter Ω0 which affects the recombination rate, adiabatic cooling rate
and the evolution of density.
   The temperature-density relation for a set of fluid elements is then determined by, among
other things, the reionization history of the universe. Given a reionization scenario and cos-
mological model, hydrodynamic simulations can predict this relation accurately, but limited
computer resources obviously restrict the number of reionization histories one can study. It is
therefore important that we develop alternative tools in order to understand the effects of a
full range of reionization histories, considering the as yet poor knowledge of the actual reion-
ization history of our universe. Moreover, it is worth pointing out that there exists analytical
tools borrowed from studies of large scale structure which can predict the distribution of ρb
with reasonable accuracy in the low density regime (Bi, Borner & Chu 1992; Bi & Davidsen
1996; Gnedin & Hui 1996; Hui, Gnedin & Zhang 1996). By their analytical/semi-analytical
nature, it is possible to study a whole range of cosmological models in an efficient manner.
What remains to be specified for these methods, in order to calculate quantities like the
column density distribution of hydrogen, is the temperature-density relation. A calculation
aiming at just that is attempted here.
   We propose to model the density evolution of each fluid element using the Zel’dovich
approximation (Zel’dovich 1970), which is known to be a good approximation in the mildly
nonlinear regime (Coles, Melott, & Shandarin 1993) and for elements where hydrodynamic
effects like pressure and shock-heating are unimportant. Given a probability distribution of
the initial configuration for these elements, which can be deduced for any given cosmological
model, one can generate a whole set of such elements and simply follow their thermal and
chemical evolution. The resulting bulk temperature-density relation can then be studied
for any chosen reionization history. The virtue of this method is that each element can be
treated independently and that the density evolution is given by an analytical formula (from
the Zel’dovich approximation) while the thermal and chemical evolution equations involve
a set of ordinary differential equations which can be solved numerically. Obviously, such a
Lagrangian method does not incorporate the effects of shock-heating properly. We check the


c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
4    Hui and Gnedin
results of our method against full hydrodynamic simulations and find good agreement for
δ<
 ∼ 5, implying shock effects are not significant in the low density regime (§ 2.2).

    Most previous work investigating the effects of different reionization histories either as-
sumes a uniform intergalactic medium (eg. Giroux & Shapiro 1996) or uses the spherical
collapse model for density evolution (eg. Miralda-Escudé & Rees 1994). For the low column
density Lyα forest, which arises naturally from a mildly fluctuating intergalactic medium,
and which hydrodynamic simulations indicate to be consisting mostly of filaments and pan-
cakes (Cen et al. 1994), the density evolution is better approximated by the Zel’dovich
approximation (Hui et al. 1996).
    A great deal of effort has been made to examine radiative transfer effects after the onset of
ionizing radiation, including the expansion of H ii regions, reprocessing by absorption systems
etc. (Zuo 1992a,b; Meiksin & Madau 1993; Miralda-Escudé & Rees 1994; Giroux & Shapiro
1996; Haardt & Madau 1996; see also Gnedin & Ostriker 1996 for numerical simulations that
include some of these effects). These effects can in principle be incorporated in our method
by specifying how the radiation intensity correlates with density and possibly allowing the
onset of reionization to occur at different times for different fluid elements. While more work
still needs to be done in order to make such a specification with reasonable accuracy, we
focus in this paper on reionization models in which the ionizing flux is uniform, but allowing
the onset-epoch, spectrum and amplitude of the ionizing flux as well as the cosmology to
vary. It turns out one can learn something about the more realistic fluctuating case, even
from these simple models, which we will discuss in § 5.
    As we will show, the mean temperature-density relation of the photoionized intergalactic
medium in the low density regime is well-approximated by a power law equation of state
(T ∝ [1 + δ]γ−1 ) where δ is the mass overdensity). The questions we would like to address are
then: how does the amplitude and slope of the equation of state depend on the reionization
history, characteristics of the ionizing radiation as well as cosmological parameters; what are
the implications for observational properties of the Lyα forest?
    Organization of the paper is as follows. In the next section, we outline a semi-analytical
method to predict the temperature-density relation for any given cosmology and reionization
history, using the Zel’dovich approximation. An example is discussed and a comparison is
made with the result of a full hydrodynamic simulation, computed using the same reion-
ization history. Then, in § 3 we apply the method to study models in which the universe
reionizes suddenly, due to a rapid outburst of radiation. We investigate systematically how
                                                                     c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
                                                            Equation of State of the IGM      5
varying the epoch of reionization, cosmological parameters and the radiation amplitude and
spectrum affects the equation of state at later redshifts. Analytical approximations to the
equation of state are derived. In § 4, it is shown that models in which reionization occurs
after a period of reheating (gradual turn-on of radiation) give equations of state that can
be well-fitted by that of an appropriate sudden reionization model. Finally we discuss the
implications of our findings for the observational properties of the Lyman-alpha Forest and
the intergalactic medium in § 5. A summary of relevant reaction rates is provided in the
Appendix.
      A few words about our terminology. The three different methods or procedures to study
the effects of reionization history, are respectively referred to as “analytical approximation”,
“semi-analytical method” and “hydrodynamic simulation”. The first is discussed in § 3,
where a few approximations are made to derive the equation of state in closed form; the
second is explained in § 2.1, which evolves the density analytically but requires numerical
integration of the thermal and chemical evolution equations, though not a full scale hydrody-
namic simulation and the third is what its name suggests. While the last method is perhaps
the most accurate (provided the numerical resolution is sufficient), the second, which is the
focus of this paper, allows us to study the temperature-density relation for a large number
of reionization histories in an efficient and accurate manner, albeit restricted to the low
density regime; the first allows us to give useful approximate quantitative expressions that
embody the correct qualitative trends. Standard symbols are used for cosmological parame-
ters: a = (1 + z)−1 where 1 + z is the cosmological redshift factor, H for the Hubble constant
as a function of z, H0 for the Hubble constant today, h for H0 /100 km s−1 Mpc−1 , Ω for
the density parameter today, with the subscript b to denote its baryon portion and 0 all its
matter content, and Λ for the contribution from cosmological constant. We use the symbol
h (in distinct from h) to denote the Planck constant in a few places where it arises and kB
to denote the Boltzman constant.


2     THE SEMI-ANALYTICAL METHOD

2.1     The Equations

In a nutshell, the method we propose is very simple: assume that the density evolution
of a given fluid element is governed by the Zel’dovich approximation; allow the element to
cool/heat and its constituents to change according to standard thermal and chemical reaction

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
6    Hui and Gnedin
rates; repeat the same procedure for a whole set of fluid elements with initial parameters
drawn from a distribution implied by whatever cosmological initial conditions one prefers (in
this paper, we study only Gaussian random initial conditions). The resulting temperature-
density relation can be obtained by making a scatter-plot of temperature versus density for
all the fluid elements at a given time of interest.
    The density evolution of a fluid element, according to the Zel’dovich approximation, is
given by:

1 + δ = det−1 [δij + D+ (t)ψij ] ,                                                            (1)

where δ is the mass overdensity, δij is the Kronecker delta and D+ (t) is the linear growth
factor (Peebles 1980), the time dependence of which is completely specified by cosmology
(e.g. it equals the Hubble scale factor a for a universe at critical matter density). The
normalization is chosen such that D+ = 1 today.
    The tensor ψij is a 3 × 3 symmetric matrix determined by initial conditions (i.e. its
components vary from one fluid element to another). One can always choose a basis in which
the matrix is diagonal. So, the problem of initial conditions reduces to finding the probability
distribution of its three eigenvalues. This problem was solved by Doroshkevich (1970) for
Gaussian random initial density field, (see also Bartelmann and Schneider (1992) for an
elegant alternative derivation) which we also assume in this paper. For recent discussions of
how to generate realizations of matrix ψij , see Bertschinger and Jain (1994) and Reisenegger
and Miralda-Escudé (1995). It can be shown that the probability distribution of the matrix
ψij is uniquely specified by the dispersion of its trace. In the limit where D+ (t) is small,
it can be seen that the trace multiplied by −D+ (t) is equal to δ i.e. the linear overdensity.
Therefore, the average of the trace vanishes and its rms (root mean squared) value is equal
to the rms linear density fluctuation today σ. At a given redshift and for a fixed number
of fluid elements, a given rms σ value would imply a probable range of δ’s in which most
elements will end up. For the range we are interested in (δ between about −0.9 and 5, at
z from 2 to 4), we find that setting the rms value σ to 2 is adequate. For a fixed number
of fluid elements, choosing a higher value for σ has the effect of shifting the probable range
of densities upward and also increasing the scatter in a plot of temperature versus density.
Alternatively, for a fixed rms value σ, one can reproduce this latter effect and increase the
number of fluid elements that fall in the desired density range by increasing the total number
of fluid elements in a realization. We find that for our densities and redshifts of interest,

                                                                    c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
                                                                 Equation of State of the IGM          7
using a different σ does not change the overall temperature-density relation significantly.
But it should be kept in mind the scatter in temperature-density relation is limited, in part,
by the finite number of elements in the realizations.
    Temperature obeys the following equation of evolution:
dT            2T dδ       T d i X̃i     2 dQ
                                           P
   = −2HT +             −P          +           ,                                                    (2)
dt          3(1 + δ) dt    i X̃i dt   3kB nb dt
where d/dt is the Lagrangian derivative following each fluid element, nb is the proper number
density of all gas particles (i.e. everything except noninteracting dark matter) and T is
the temperature which depends on both space and time. The symbol X̃i is defined by
ni ≡ (1 + δ)X̃i ρ̄b /mp , where ni is the proper number density of the specie i, ρ̄b is the mean
mass density of baryons at the time of interest and mp is the mass of the proton and δ is the
mass overdensity. For example the neutral fraction of hydrogen, XH i (to be distinguished
from X̃H i ), is then X̃H i /(X̃H i + X̃H ii ). Note that X̃i is a function of space and time in general.
    The first two terms on the right hand side take care of adiabatic cooling or heating. The
third accounts for the change of internal energy per particle due to the change in the number
of particles. The last term dQ/dt is the heat gain (or negative hear loss) per unit volume by
the gas particles from the surrounding radiation field. The heating and cooling rates due to
photoionization, recombination and compton scattering are summarized in the Appendix.
    Equation (2) has to be supplemented by one that determines the abundance of each
particle type, which takes the form:
                                 "           #
dX̃i             X               ρ̄b (1 + δ)
     = −X̃i Γi +     X̃j X̃k Rjk             ,                                                       (3)
 dt              j,k                  mp
where Γi is the photoionization rate of the specie i and Rjk is the recombination rate (in
units of volume per unit time) of the species j and k to give i. The photoionization rate is
given by
                       dν
       Z ∞
Γi =         4πJν σi      ,                                                                          (4)
       νi              hν
where Jν is the specific intensity of the ionizing radiation as a function of frequency ν, νi is
the frequency above which a photon can ionize the specie i and σi is the cross-section for
this process. The cross-sections for different species as well as the recombination rates are
given in the Appendix.
    What remains to be specified is the time evolution of the specific intensity of the ionizing
radiation as a function of frequency, which determines the photoionization (Γi ) and photoion-


c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
8      Hui and Gnedin




Figure 1. A a scatter-plot (black dots) of temperature versus density of 40000 cells randomly drawn from a 643 CDM+Λ
hydrodynamic at z = 4 using the SLH-P3 M algorithm (see Gnedin 1995 and Gnedin & Bertschinger 1996) with Ω0 = 0.35,
ΩΛ = 0.65, Ωb = 0.055 and h = 0.7 (left panel ). The evolution of the ionizing background for the simulation is shown in shown
in Fig. 2. The right panel shows the temperature-density relation obtained for exactly the same cosmological and radiation
parameters using the semi-analytical method described in § 2.1, applied to 2000 fluid elements. The larger scatter in Fig. 1a
compared to 1b is in part due to the smaller number of elements in the latter. The solid line plotted in both figures correspond
to the analytical approximation expressed in equations (13), (19) and (22) for a sudden reionization model where the epoch of
reionization is z = 9.6.


ization heating (dQ/dt) rates. We will examine the effects of a wide range of amplitudes,
spectra and time evolution of the ionizing radiation in this paper.
      Equations (1), (2), and (3) completely determine the thermal and chemical evolution
of a fluid element. They are numerically integrated for each fluid element with the initial
condition for δ determined as discussed before. The thermal and chemical initial conditions
are chosen as follows. The gas temperature T is equal to the cosmic microwave background
temperature at 1 + z = 100(Ωb h2 /0.0125)2/5 (maintained by Compton scattering; Peebles
1993) and evolves adiabatically after that until the universe is reionized by the UV back-
ground. Abundances are assumed to be primordial, which is consistent with observations so
far in the low density intergalactic medium. All species are neutral to high accuracy until
reionization occurs. One can integrate equations (2) and (3) forward starting from any time
between z = 100 and the beginning of reionization.


2.2     Comparison with Hydrodynamic Simulation

We show in Fig. 1 scatter plots of temperature versus density at z = 4 obtained using the
semi-analytical method outlined above and using a full hydrodynamic simulation respec-


                                                                                          c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
                                                                              Equation of State of the IGM                 9




Figure 2. Evolution of JH i (solid line), JHe i (dashed line) and JHe ii (dotted line) as a function of redshift, used in the
computations shown in Fig. 1. The Ji ’s are defined in equation (5).


tively. The same uniform ionization field has been used for both of them, the evolution of
which is shown in Fig. 2.⋆ The radiation field is computed in a hydrodynamic simulation
that includes the effects of star formation (see Gnedin and Ostriker 1996). In Fig. 22, we
quantify the level of the ionizing radiation by the photoionization rates it implies i.e.
       R∞
           4πJν σi dν/ν
Ji = νRi ∞              (10−21 ergs Hz−1 s−1 cm−2 ster−1 )−1 ,                                                           (5)
        νi  4πσ i dν/ν
where the notations are the same as those defined in equation (4). For instance, JH i is
related to the photoionization rate of neutral hydrogen ΓH i by ΓH i ∼ 4 × 10−12 JH i s−1 (A
more accurate proportionality constant can be inferred from the cross-section σH i given in
our Appendix). The three different quantities JH i , JHe i and JHe ii shown in Fig. 2 do not
completely specify Jν , but they give an indication of how Jν changes with time at different
frequencies. The full spectrum of Jν is of course known and used in producing the results

⋆ See § 5 for a discussion of the effect of a non-uniform radiation field.




c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
10      Hui and Gnedin
shown in Fig. 1 but we do not show it here. (In practice, one actually needs only three
more pieces of information regarding Jν for the thermal evolution of a gas of primordial
composition: the photoionization heating rates of H i, He i and He ii.)
      Our simple semi-analytical method gives a temperature-density relation which is well-
approximated by a power law for δ <
                                  ∼ 5. It gives the correct mean behavior of gas elements

in the full hydrodynamic simulation in the low density regime. The larger scatter in Fig.
1a compared to 1b is in part due to the smaller number of fluid elements in the latter. At
higher densities, one begins to see the effect of shocks: a wide scatter of temperature at a fixed
density. The calculation shown in Fig. 1b is not reliable in this regime. This is because by
assuming that density evolves as prescribed by the Zel’dovich approximation, which is only
a good approximation for pressureless (dark) matter or baryons at large scales, one misses
the effects of gas pressure and shocks as the fluid element is compressed to sufficiently high
densities.
      We have made a number of similar comparisons between the temperature-density rela-
tions obtained from hydrodynamic simulations versus using our semi-analytical method, for
a number of different Jν ’s as a function of time. The semi-analytical method consistently
gives the correct mean behavior of gas elements of low density. Keeping in mind the intrinsic
scatter such as that seen in Fig. 1a, we can make use of our simple semi-analytical method
to efficiently study the mean temperature-density relation at the low density regime for a
large number of reionization scenarios, which is the subject of the next two sections.


3     SUDDEN REIONIZATION MODELS

3.1     Variation with the Epoch of Reionization

In Fig. 3a,b,c and d, we show the temperature-density relation for four different sudden
reionization models, where the reionization epoch is systematically varied. All of them have
no ionizing background until the specified epoch and then JH i (eq. [5]) is taken to be 0.5
from thereon i.e.
         Jion for a ≥ areion , and
       (
JH i =                                                                                         (6)
         0    for a < areion ,
where areion = (1 + zreion )−1 is the Hubble scale factor when the radiation is turned on and
the parameter Jion is chosen to be 0.5 (we will study the effects of varying Jion later on).



                                                                     c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
                                                                                Equation of State of the IGM                   11




Figure 3. The temperature-density relation for 4 different sudden-reionization models: sudden reionization (see eq. [6]) at
z = 5 (a), z = 7 (b), z = 10 (c), and z = 19 (d). For each reionization model, the black dots shown are the results of calculations
using the semi-analytical method outlined in §2.1 for 2000 elements, shown at three different instants: z being 4, 3 and 2 from
top to bottom. The cosmological parameters are h = 0.5, Ω0 = 1 and Ωb h2 = 0.0125 (with primordial abundances for hydrogen
and helium). The ionizing background is specified by its amplitude JH i = 0.5 (eq. [5]) and spectrum obeying equation (7)
with f = 0.01. The solid, dotted, and dashed lines, from top to bottom for each reionization model, represent the analytical
expressions for the equation of state in equations (13), (19), and (22), using the corresponding cosmological parameters and
reionization-epoch for each model. The only exception is panel (d) where the lines shown are exactly the same as those in the
panel (c), i.e. setting areion = 1/11 in equations (19) and (22) (see explanation in the text).


     It is assumed that Jν ∝ ν −1 , except that it suffers a factor of f = 0.01 reduction beyond
the frequency corresponding to the ionization of He ii:
                           −1
                         ν
       
           J0       ν
                                   for ν ≤ νHe ii , and
Jν =              H i −1                                                                                                    (7)
        f J0            ν
       
                     νH i
                                   for ν > νHe i ,
where J0 is chosen so that JH i (eq. [5]) has the desired value, νHe ii is the frequency corre-
sponding to the ionization of He ii and f (now chosen to be 0.01) is a parameter specifying
by how much the ionizing radiation is to be further diminished beyond νHe ii .

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
12        Hui and Gnedin
     Ignoring for the time being the solid, dotted and dashed lines in Fig. 3 which will be
discussed in the next section, the first trend to notice is that the earlier the epoch of reion-
ization, the lower the overall temperature at a given redshift, except that for sufficiently
early reionization (zreion > 10) , the temperature-density relation approaches an asymptote.
The second, somewhat striking, result is how well the temperature-density relations are ap-
proximated by power-law equations of state, where the slope steepens as universe reionizes
earlier. The third is that when the reionization epoch is pushed sufficiently early, the exact
time when it occurs makes very little difference to the equation of state: hence the very
similar temperature-density relations for reionization starting at z = 10 and z = 19 in Fig.
3c and 3d.
     To understand these trends, we perform the following approximate analytical calculation.


3.1.1 Analytical Calculation

First, let us determine the reionization temperature. In the limit when a substantial amount
of radiation is suddenly turned on, one can approximate equations (2) and (3) by:
     dT         T d i X̃i            2 X̃HI                                       dν
                         P                      Z ∞
           = −P                 +                       4πJν σH i (hν − hνH i )                             (8)
     dt         i X̃i     dt        3kB i X̃i                                     hν
                                         P
                                                 νH i

dX̃H i                              dν
                    Z ∞
           = −X̃H i       4πJν σH i    ,
 dt                  νH i           hν
where we have used equation (4) and have taken the crude approximation that the only two
processes which significantly affect the temperature under the short timescale of reionization
(reciprocal of photoionization rate) are photoionization heating of hydrogen:
dQ        Z ∞
                                        dν
   ∼ nH i       4πJν σH i (hν − hνH i )                                                                     (9)
dt         νH i                         hν
and the change in the total number of gas particles. Note that during this brief period of
radiation turn-on, the abundances of various species are far from equilibrium.
     To integrate the above equations, we adopt the further approximation that the universe
has only hydrogen, i.e. the term           i X̃i = 2 − X̃H i . Putting T = 0 right before reionization
                                       P

because the temperature right after is much higher, we obtain the large time limit of T :
                                "Z                                                         #
          1                        ∞                         dν                        dν
                                                                      Z ∞
Treion =     EJ ,        EJ ≡         4πJν σH i (hν − hνH i ) /              4πJν σH i    ,                (10)
         3kB                     νH i                        hν         νH i           hν
where EJ is kept constant after the radiation field is turned on. This is the temperature that
the intergalactic medium reaches asymptotically before recombination processes become
important and halts the exponential decrease of X̃H i , setting its value to that implied by

                                                                                  c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
                                                              Equation of State of the IGM        13

ionization equilibrium thereafter (hydrogen is now highly ionized). Making use of Jν ∝ ν −1 ,
it can be shown that Treion ∼ 20000 K. This value is not significantly affected by the slope
of Jν assuming it is between −1 and −1.5 at frequencies immediately above νH i , nor by the
behavior of Jν at still higher frequencies.
   Therefore, the first conclusion to draw is that for sudden reionization models, the tem-
perature of reionization is largely independent of JH i , density, the epoch of reionization or
even cosmology. We checked this for a few fluid elements in the computations shown in Fig.
3 and found that it is indeed the case. One possible exception, which we will discuss in § 3.3,
is that changing the spectrum of Jν can affect the helium abundance, which in turn has a
non-negligible effect on Treion . For sufficiently high redshifts, areion <
                                                                          ∼ 1/15, we also find Treion

to be a little less than the value given above, because of non-negligible amount of Compton
cooling.
   Next, we consider the evolution of T from the epoch of reionization to z = 2, 3 and 4.
Judging from the result in Fig. 3 that for sufficiently early reionization, the temperature-
density relation approaches an asymptote, it seems reasonable to assume that what matters
is the dominant thermal and chemical reaction rates at the later redshifts. In this regime, the
dominant heating mechanism is again the photoionization of neutral hydrogen, aside from
adiabatic heating/cooling (recall that we assume a universe filled with only hydrogen). For
sufficiently low temperature, recombination (of proton and electron) cooling is subdominant
compared to photoionization heating (at temperature of the order of 104 K, recombination
cooling rate is smaller but actually not negligible compared to photoionization heating; it is
again a crude approximation we adopt to make the problem tractable analytically). Putting
all these into equation (2), the thermal evolution is then approximated by:
dT            2T dδ      2 X̃H ii X̃e ρ̄b
   = −2HT +            +                  (1 + δ)REJ                                            (11)
dt          3(1 + δ) dt 3kB i X̃i mp
                            P

where we have ignored the term in equation (2) due to the change in the number of species,
used equations (4), (9) and (10) and assumed ionization equilibrium (setting the right hand
side of eq. [3] to zero), with R approximately given by
                   T −0.7 3 −1
R ≈ 4 × 10−13 (        ) cm s .                                                                 (12)
                  104K
A more accurate expression for R is given in the Appendix and used for our semi-analytical
computation but this approximate form suffices for the present analytical calculation. More-



c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
14     Hui and Gnedin

over, assuming again there is only hydrogen in the universe, we will approximate X̃H ii X̃e /     i X̃i
                                                                                                P

by 1/2 (recall that hydrogen is now highly ionized).
     Even with this highly simplified equation, the problem of predicting the temperature-
density relation is still untractable analytically, if one uses the density evolution as expressed
in equation (1). One possible approximation is to assume the collapse/expansion occurs
only along one direction i.e. 1 + δ = 1/(1 − D+ λ) where λ is a constant specified by initial
conditions. Equation (11) can then be solved analytically but it turns out the resulting
equations of state differ qualitatively from the ones shown in Fig. 3 in the sense that at high
and low densities, the predicted temperature tends to be higher than what it actually is. This
is because in three dimensions, most fluid elements that reach higher densities do so by having
one axis collapsing while the two others expand. By ignoring the expansion in the other two
axes (as in a one-dimensional calculation) and thereby missing extra adiabatic cooling, the
temperature is systematically over-estimated. Moreover, most elements that reach the lower
densities also have at least two axes expanding and so the one-dimensional calculation again
underestimates the amount of cooling. The combination of both effects conspire to give an
equation of state that resembles a power-law for genuine three-dimensional fluid elements.
     The next best question to ask is then: given that the outcome is a power-law equation
of state, can we at least predict its amplitude and slope? To do so, we turn to linear theory.
We expand the logarithm of T to first order in δ:

lnT = lnT0 + (γ − 1)δ = lnT0 + (γ − 1)[ln(1 + δ)] ,                                             (13)

where T0 is simply the temperature of a fluid element that remains at the cosmic mean
density and γ − 1 multiplied by δ gives the fluctuation about the mean (the notation γ − 1
is chosen to agree with the common notation as in eq. [14]). The second equality holds
in the small δ limit. The power-law slope relating temperature and density for small δ is
then given by d lnT /d ln(1 + δ) = γ − 1. Knowing that a single power-law equation of state
approximately holds even for δ not very small, γ −1 is then taken to be the correct power-law
slope throughout our range of interest i.e.

T = T0 (1 + δ)γ−1                                                                               (14)

     Putting δ = 0 into equation (11) and making use of the relation H = H0 Ω0 1/2 (1 + z)3/2
where Ω0 is the ratio of matter density to critical density today (the expression is exact for
Ω0 = 1 and approximately true at sufficiently high redshift; see Peebles 1993 Chapter 5), it
is possible to show that
                                                                     c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
                                                                             Equation of State of the IGM    15

da2 T0             1
       = T0−0.7 a− 2 B                                                                                      (15)
 da
where B is defined by
                          2
                                                Ωb h2
                                                         "                     #
   ρc100          0.7 Ωb h        0.7       1
B≡       Treion RT0    √    ≈ 10 K Treion  √                                                                (16)
    mp               H0 Ω0                h Ω0 0.0125
where ρc100 is the critical density today if H0 = 100 km s−1 Mpc−1 , Treion is given by equation
(10) and R is the recombination rate give in equation (12) (note that the combination
RT 0.7 is independent of temperature) and Ωb , Ω0 , h and H0 are cosmological parameters as
explained in the Introduction. Note also temperature is measured in Kelvin and B has the
dimension of K1.7 , hence the factor of K0.7 in the last expression.
    Integrating equation (15), we obtain:
         a2
                                        "                1.9 #
                              1.7 − 3      areion
                                              
T01.7 = ( reion
            2
                Treion )1.7 +    a 2    1−                         B.                                       (17)
           a                 1.9             a
The initial condition is chosen such that T = Treion (eq. [10]) at a = areion , the epoch of
reionization.
    The equation of evolution for γ − 1 can be derived from equation (11) by expanding T
as in equation (13) and collecting terms that are first order in δ:
                   Ω0 0.6       d lna2 T0   dlna2 T0 2 Ω0 0.6
                       "                          #
d(γ − 1)
         + (γ − 1)        + 1.7           =         +         .                                             (18)
   da               a              da          da     3 a
In deriving the above, we have made use of the fact that the linear growth factor D+ , which
controls the growth of δ for small δ (δ ∝ D+ ) obeys the relation d lnD+ /d lna = Ω0 0.6 , which
is exact for critical matter density and approximate otherwise (Peebles 1980).
    Equation (18) is a linear ordinary differential equation for γ, which is straightforward,
if somewhat tedious, to solve. Recalling that Treion is independent of δ, we use the initial
condition γ − 1 = 0 at a = areion and obtain:
                                  !1.7                       
                                                     Ω0 0.6
      1    a2reion Treion                  areion                      2   1
                                                                                
γ−1=     1−                                                    +         −   (a2 T0 )−1.7 Ω0 0.6 C ,       (19)
     1.7        a2 T0                         a                         3 1.7
where C is defined by
                       a1.9                                  a1.9
                   "                                                                            #
         1.7                             areion 1.9+Ω0 0.6                areion Ω0 0.6
                                                                           
                                                              reion
C≡           B                0.6  1 − (       )           −    0.6 1 − (       )                           (20)
         1.9      1.9 + Ω0                 a                 Ω0             a
           (a2reion Treion )1.7       areion Ω0 0.6
                                                   
         +                        1−(        )
                  Ω0 0.6                 a
where B and T0 are defined in equations (16) and (17). The slope γ − 1 = d lnT /d ln(1 + δ)
exhibits the correct qualitative behavior found using our semi-analytical computation shown
in Fig. 3. We plot in Fig. 4 the evolution of γ − 1 as given by equation (19) for a number

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
16     Hui and Gnedin




Figure 4. The evolution of γ − 1 as given by equation (19) for areion = 1/6 (solid line), areion = 1/8 (dotted line) and
areion = 1/11 (dashed line). Here Treion = 20000 K and Ω0 = 1 in all cases.


of different areion . An interesting consequence of the above expression for the slope is a limit
as to how steep the temperature-density relation can be (or an upper limit to γ − 1). In the
limit where reionization occurs very early:
                1   0.078Ω0
γmax − 1 =        +             .                                                                                 (21)
               1.7 1.9 + Ω0 0.6
Hence, the maximum possible value for γ −1 is 0.62 (assuming Ω0 ≤ 1). This has interesting
implications for the slope of the column density distribution of the Lyman alpha forest, which
we will discuss in § 5.
     We show in Fig. 5 a comparison of the above expressions (eq. [13], [17] and [19]) with the
temperature-density relation obtained by solving numerically the rate equations as outlined
in Sec 2.1. The evolution of the slope is quite accurately captured by our analytical approx-
imation in equation (19). However, the amplitude T0 predicted by equation (17) is off: the
overall predicted temperature is lower than what it actually is and the the predicted spread
in T0 from z = 2 to z = 4 is also larger than what the semi-analytical calculation shows (Fig.
5b). This is mainly because helium is not taken into account at all in the above treatment.
By ignoring heating due to photoionization of helium, we systematically underestimates T0
in our analytical calculation. The time evolution for T0 is also not quite right for the same
reason. We therefore introduce the following modification of equation (17) that gives an
excellent fit to the results of the semi-analytical calculations shown in Fig. 3:


                                                                                     c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
                                                                              Equation of State of the IGM                  17




Figure 5. Temperature-density relation for two sudden-reionization models: comparison of results of semi-analytical calcula-
tions (black dots) and predictions based on analytical approximations expressed in equations (13), (17), and (19) (solid, dotted
and dashed lines). The model parameters are described in the caption of Fig. 3. The black dots in the left panel and right panel
are exactly the same points as those in Fig. 3a and Fig. 3c respectively , i.e. sudden reionization at z = 6 and z = 19. From
top to bottom for each figure, the results are shown at z = 4, 3, and 2 respectively for the black dots and also for the lines.
Notice how the predicted slopes match quite well while the amplitudes are off. A modified version of equation (17) (eq. [22])
gives much better fit to the amplitudes and is used instead in the rest of this paper.


         a2                    1.7 − 3 + a−0.25    areion 1.9
                                                                     
T01.7 = ( reion
            2
                T̃reion )1.7 +     a 2     a    1−            B                ,   T̃reion = 25000 K                      (22)
          a                    1.9                   a
where we have modified the power index of a in the second term on the right hand side and
used T̃reion = 25000, in place of Treion given in equation (10). In general, a different best-fit
T̃reion would have to be chosen for different abundances of the helium species, when one
varies the spectrum of the ionizing radiation, for instance. We will return to this point later.
    On the other hand, the slope of the equation of state γ − 1 is quite insensitive to the
exact value of Treion , and using the original estimate (eq. [10]) in equation (19) is sufficiently
accurate.
    The analytical predictions for the equation of state shown in Fig. 3 are based on this
modified version of T0 (eq. [22]) together with equations (13) and (19). Note that, for the
case in which the universe reionizes at z = 19, the temperature-density relation is very close
to that of the case in which the universe reionizes at z = 10. This turns out to be a general
trend, that there is an asymptotic temperature-density relation when the universe reionizes
sufficiently early. To see how this asymptotic state is approached, we show in Fig. 10 the
evolution in temperature of one particular fluid element for different reionization histories.
Notice how the solid line (sudden reionization at z = 10) and the dotted line (sudden

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
18      Hui and Gnedin




Figure 6. The temperature-density relations for Ωb h2 = 0.025 (upper black dots) and Ωb h2 = 0.0125 (lower black dots)
at z = 3 for sudden reionization model with radiation-turn-on at z = 7. The rest of the cosmological parameters are exactly
the same as those given in Fig. 3. The dotted and solid lines are the predictions according to equations (13), (19) and (22),
respectively for the two models.


reionization at z = 19) converges. The other lines in the figure corresponds to reionization
models that will be discussed later. We also find that fluid elements at other densities also
exhibit the same kind of convergence towards an asymptotic state.
      The expressions in equations (13), (19), and (22) are derived by ignoring processes like
Compton cooling which are important at higher redshifts, if the universe is already reionized
by then. Hence, the analytical expressions are not quite as accurate for areion < 1/11. How-
ever, we can make use of the knowledge of asymptotic behavior for early reionization models
and use simply the areion = 1/11 result of equations (13), (19), and (22) for any models in
which reionization occurs earlier than z = 10. This is what we have done in making Fig. 3d.
      We now turn to two other interesting variations of the sudden-reionization models.


3.2     Variation with Cosmology

We investigate the temperature-density relations for different cosmological parameters, in-
cluding the baryon density, the Hubble constant and the fraction of critical density in mat-
ter. One example is shown in Fig. 6, where Ωb h2 has been increased by a factor of two from
the value in Fig. 3. Once again, we find that a power-law equation of state gives an ade-
quate description of the temperature-density relation. Moreover, the analytical expressions
in equations (13), (19), and (22) work quite well in describing the change in amplitude and

                                                                                        c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
                                                           Equation of State of the IGM     19

slope. As predicted by equations (22) and (16), the overall temperature increases as Ωb h2
is raised because the rate of photoionization heating is increased. (Recombination cooling
rate is actually also increased but photoionization heating is the dominant entropy changing
process.)
      We have also tried other variations such as lowering Ω0 . A realistic structure formation
model such as the cosmological constant dominated Cold Dark Matter model with Ω0 = 0.35
and h = 0.7 (Kofman, Gnedin, & Bahcall 1993; Ostriker & Steinhardt 1995) does not give
a very different temperature-density relation from the ones shown in Fig. 3 (using the same
Ωb h2 ). This can be understood from equations (22) and (16), where it is clear the overall
                                                                          √
temperature to the 1/1.7-th power is dependent upon the combination h Ω0 which only
varies from 0.5 for the model in Fig. 3 to about 0.4 in the cosmological constant model.
      In general, we find that equations (13), (19) and (22) give an agreement to the actual
temperature-density relation to within 20% for a variety of cosmological models we have
tested. A large part of this error has to do with the fact that changing Ω0 and h changes the
amount of time helium photoionization heating or recombination cooling has to act to make
a difference to the thermal evolution. The effect of helium is what we will discuss next.


3.3     Variation with Amplitude and Spectrum of Radiation

The last set of tests we perform for the class of sudden reionization models is to vary the
spectrum and amplitude of the ionization radiation. We find that varying the amplitude
of the ionization radiation does not affect the temperature-density relation significantly,
as predicted by equations (19) and (22), as long as the flux level is sufficient to maintain
the universe highly ionized. This is shown in Fig. 7a and 7b, which corresponds to choosing
Jion = 0.1 and Jion = 2.0 respectively in equation (6). A comparison of the two figures reveals
a slight decrease in temperature when JH i is raised, which is a result of more opportunities
for recombination cooling, but the effect is very small and becomes insignificant at lower
redshifts (z = 2).
      The main effect of varying the spectrum (when fixing JH i defined in eq. [5]) is that one
changes the relative abundance of the different species of helium. which could have a non-
negligible effect on the temperature due to recombination cooling of the ionized species and
photoionization heating of neutral helium. We test this effect by varying the He ii cut-off
factor f in equation (7). Two examples are shown in Fig. 8 where we replot the lines in Fig.


c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
20      Hui and Gnedin




Figure 7. The effect of varying the amplitude of Jν on the temperature-density relation. Black points in the left panel (Fig.
7a) are the result of semi-analytical calculation of sudden reionization at areion = 1/8 with Jion = 0.1 (eq. [6]) while those in
the right panel (Fig. 7b) has Jion = 2.0 starting from the same areion . The spectrum is chosen to be the same with f = 0.01
(eq. [7]) for both panels. The outputs from top to bottom are at z = 4, 3 and 2. The same solid, dotted, and dashed lines are
drawn for both panels to facilitate comparison. They are also exactly the same as the lines in Fig. 3b, based on the analytical
expressions in equations (13), (19), and (22), using areion = 1/8. The cosmological parameters in Fig. 7 are exactly the same
as those in Fig. 3.




Figure 8. The effect of varying radiation spectrum on the temperature-density relation. Black dots are the results obtained
by the semi-analytical calculation explained in § 2.1. The reionization and cosmological model here is, except for the spectrum,
exactly the same as that in Fig. 3a where the universe reionizes suddenly at z = 6. The solid, dotted and dashed lines of Fig. 3a
are reproduced here for comparison. Above and below the solid line at the top are two sets of points at z = 4 which correspond
to choosing f = 1.0 (less He ii) and f = 10−4 (more He ii) respectively in equation (7). The same is also true for the two sets of
points surrounding the dotted line, except that they are at z = 3. Results are not shown for z = 2 because the two different f ’s
give significantly overlapping results that are well-represented by the dashed line. The amplitude JH i = 0.5 (eq. [5]) is adopted
throughout.




                                                                                            c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
                                                             Equation of State of the IGM    21
3a (which match the temperature-density relations for f = 0.01 quite well) together with
the result of two semi-analytical calculations for f = 1.00 and f = 10−4 respectively. By
decreasing f or the amount of radiation energetic enough to ionize He ii, one increases the
abundance of He ii offering more opportunities for recombination cooling, thereby lowering
the overall temperature. The reverse happens when f is raised. The change in temperature
due to this effect could be as large as 20%, with less change as one goes to lower redshift,
for a fixed reionization history. One can compensate the error in the analytical estimate
of T0 (which ignores the effect of helium) by lowering/raising T̃reion in equation (22) as
one decreases/increases f (For instance, choosing T̃reion = 28000 for the f = 1 case and
T̃reion = 22000 for the f = 10−4 works reasonably well).
   The power-law slope, on the other hand, does not vary significantly with the spectrum of
the ionizing background. It can be seen from Fig. 8 that there is a slight decrease of slope for
the corresponding redshifts as one lowers f . This is due to the fact that He ii recombination
cooling has a stronger effect at higher density. The analytical prediction for the slope in
equation (19) works best when the effects of helium is negligible, as can be seen from the
better match of slopes for the f = 1 case. Nevertheless, on the whole, we find that the
prediction of equation (19) for the slope is quite robust.
   To summarize the results of this section, we find that the temperature-density relation
at z of 2 to 4 for sudden-reionization models is well described by a power-law equation
of state, with a scatter that depends on the total number of fluid elements. The overall
amplitude decreases and the slope steepens as the epoch of reionization is pushed earlier;
but the equation of state rapidly approaches an asymptotic limit for reionization occurring
at redshifts beyond 10. Quantitative estimates for the slope and amplitude are given in
equations (19) and (22). While the analytical prediction for the slope is relatively robust
for various cosmologies and spectra, the prediction for the amplitude agrees with the results
of the semi-analytical calculations (outlined in § 2.1) to within 20% for reasonable range of
cosmological and ionization parameters. Most of the error comes from the neglect of helium
in obtaining the analytical estimate, which can be compensated if one allows T̃reion to change
in equation (22) according to the abundance of the helium species (Fig. 8).




c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
22     Hui and Gnedin
4    REIONIZATION PRECEDED BY REHEATING

The idealization of sudden reionization in the last section allows us to understand the various
trends of the temperature-density relation analytically. It is quite possible that the ionizing
radiation is turned on more gradually in nature. In particular, we focus on a class of models
in which radiation is turned on at some early time, with an intensity large enough to heat
up the intergalactic medium but small enough so that the neutral fractions remain high
(large recombination rates) though slowly decreasing. This is motivated by hydrodynamic
simulations (see Gnedin & Ostriker 1996) in which collapsed regions of high density (could
be stars/quasars) are assumed to give out radiation. As the formation rate of these regions
increases with time and the neutral fraction drops steadily, the ionizing intensity climbs until
at some point, the universe becomes highly ionized (neutral fraction of hydrogen less than
10−4 ), thus completing the reionization process when the radiation levels off and species
abundances are simply given by ionization equilibrium. The simulation shown in Fig. 1a
and 2 is one such example.
     To investigate the implications of these reionization models systematically, we adopt the
following parametrization for the evolution of the ionizing radiation:
        Jion         for a ≥ aion ,
       
       
                          7
                      a
JH i =  Jheat       aion
                                 for aion > a ≥ aheat ,                                       (23)
       
       
           0                     for aheat > a,
where JH i is defined in equation (5), aheat and aion denote the size of the Hubble scale factor
at the onset of reheating and reionization. The slope a7 in the second row of equation (23)
comes from fitting JH i (a) in Fig. 2. The spectrum of Jν is assumed to have the same form
as in equation (7) with f = 0.01 and J0 chosen to match whatever JH i specified above.
     Before discussing the results for these models, let us point out that in Fig. 1, we have
already shown an example of the temperature-density relation of a reionization-preceded-by-
reheating model where J varies with time as in Fig. 2. Notice how the temperature-density
relation can be approximated by an equation of state resulting from a sudden reionization
model (the solid line in Fig. 1). The same turns out to be true for all other reionization
models we have tested, with the parametrization given in equation (23).
     Two interesting examples are shown in Fig. 9. Both have the same epochs of reheating and
reionization (aheat and aion ). The only difference is the amount of reheating that occurs: Jheat
being 0.001 versus 0.1 in equation (23). They can both be approximately fitted with sudden
reionization models (no preceding reheating period) where the epoch of sudden reionization
                                                                     c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
                                                                               Equation of State of the IGM                  23




Figure 9. Black dots in Fig. 9a on the left show the temperature-density relation for a reionization model in which aheat = 1/20,
aion = 1/6, Jheat = 0.001 and Jion = 0.5 (see eq. [23]). The three sets of points are from top to bottom at z = 4, 3 and 2. The
solid, dotted and dashed lines are analytical approximations of sudden reionization models expressed in equations (13), (19),
and (22), choosing areion = 1/8.4. Fig. 9b on the right, on the other hand, corresponds to the choice of parameters aheat = 1/20,
aion = 1/6, Jheat = 0.1 and Jion = 0.5 in eq. [23]. The analytical approximations shown have areion equal to 1/10 in equation
(13), (19) and (22). For both Fig. 9a and 9b, the cosmological model is the same as that in Fig. 3.


is chosen to lie somewhere between aheat and aion . The larger the amount of reheating, the
earlier the epoch of reionization is required. It is also interesting to note that in Fig. 9a, the
fit to the result at z = 4 is not as good as those at z = 3 or z = 2. It is because it takes some
time for the universe to settle to its asymptotic state (i.e a state which is independent of
prior history, whether it be sudden reionization, gradual reionization with preheating, etc).
The same should also be true for Fig. 9b, except that because the amount of preheating
is more significant, the universe, in effect, has more time to settle to its asymptotic state,
hence the better agreement with sudden reionization models for all three redshifts.
    To illustrate this convergence towards an asymptotic state, we show in Fig. 10 the evolu-
tion of temperature for one particular fluid element for four different reionization histories.
The tendency to approach the same limiting temperature, for a given density evolution,
can be clearly seen. Note how the model illustrated with a long-dashed line evolves to a
temperature a little higher than the others, by z = 2. This is because of its relatively small
amount of reheating (small Jheat in eq. [23]) which implies the universe effectively reionizes
at a latter redshift, giving it less time to settle to its asymptotic state.
    We have tested several other reionization models where all the parameters in equation
(23) are varied systematically. The same conclusion holds for all of them, namely that a sud-


c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
24      Hui and Gnedin




Figure 10. Examples of convergence towards an asymptotic state. In the upper panel is shown the evolution of the overdensity
of a fluid element as a function of redshift. In the lower panel is shown the evolution of temperature for the same fluid element,
but for a variety of reionization histories. The solid and dotted lines both correspond to sudden reionization models in which
areion = 1/11 and areion = 1/20 respectively and Jion = 0.5 in equation (6). Their reionization and cosmological parameters
are exactly the same as those in Fig. 3c and 3d respectively. The short dashed and long dashed lines correspond exactly to
the reionization models shown in Fig. 9b and 9a respectively i.e. reionization-preceded-by-reheating models with aheat = 1/20,
aion = 1/6, Jion = 0.5 and Jheat = 0.1 for short dashed line and Jheat = 0.001 for long dashed line (see eq. [23]). The
cosmological parameters for these two latter models are the same as those for the solid and dotted lines.


den reionization model (no preceding reheating) can always be found to fit the temperature-
density relation of any reionization model with reheating, with the turn-on redshift of the
former chosen somewhere between the epochs of reheating and reionization of the latter.


5    DISCUSSION

Let us summarize what we have learned so far.
     We find that the temperature-density relation of the low density intergalactic medium,
while having an intrinsic scatter, is well described by a mean equation of state of the form
T = T0 (1 + δ)γ−1 . It is shown that any reionization model with gradual radiation-turn-on
produces equation of state that can be well approximated by one produced by a suitably
chosen sudden turn-on model (§ 4).
     In general, the mean temperature T0 at δ = 0 at a given redshift z ∼ 2 − 4 decreases
as the epoch of reionization is pushed earlier. It is only weakly dependent on the ampli-
tude of the ionizing flux JH i at z ∼ 2 − 4 assuming reionization takes place at z >
                                                                                   ∼ 5. The

spectrum of Jν can introduce about 20% change to T0 . Its main effect is on the abundances
of helium species, affecting the amount of photoionization heating and recombination cool-

                                                                                            c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
                                                              Equation of State of the IGM      25
ing. Cosmological parameters change T0 in a simple way: for sufficiently early reionization,
           √
T0 ∝ (Ωb h/ Ω0 )1/1.7 . All the dependence mentioned above are expressed in a quantita-
tive way in equation (22), with about 20% accuracy depending on the spectrum of Jν and
cosmology.
   The slope of the equation of state, γ − 1, increases with redshift and with earlier reion-
ization epoch (eq. [19] and Fig. 4). Its evolution is only weakly dependent on cosmology.
There exists a maximum as to how steep γ − 1 can get, which is about 0.62 (eq. [21]).
Strictly speaking, γ − 1 can be as small as 0 right at the onset of sudden reionization, but
for reionization occurring earlier than zreion ∼ 5, it is greater than 0.3 at z = 3; for zreion > 7
the minimum γ is about 0.47.
   What do all these imply for the observable properties of the low column density Lyα
forest? Firstly, for a given density (or 1 + δ) profile and the Hubble constant h, the column
density it corresponds to is proportional to Ω2b T −0.7 JH−1i . Uncertainty in the reionization
history introduces about 50% uncertainty in T (see Fig. 3), which in turn implies about 30%
uncertainty in column density. This means an additional uncertainty in the amplitude of the
column density distribution on top of that due to Ωb and JH i , even if one is given a known
cosmological model (Hui et al. 1996).
   Note that for sufficiently early reionization, the dependence T0 ∝ Ωb 1/1.7 implies that the
                                 2−0.7/1.7
column density is scaled by Ωb               = Ω1.6
                                                b , which is roughly consistent with the result of

Croft et al. (1996), who found Ω1.7
                                b scaling using hydrodynamic simulations.

   The good news, on the other hand, is that the slope of the column density distribution is
relatively independent of reionization history. The slope of the column density distribution
(number of absorption lines per unit column density per unit redshift ∝ NH−βi where NH i is
the column density) is approximately given by:
                 1
β =1+                      [0.96 − 2(σ0 − 1)]                                                 (24)
         1.68 − 0.7(γ − 1)
where σ0 is the rms mass fluctuation at scales close to the Jeans length. It is close to 1 but
its precise value is determined by the cosmological model (Hui et al. 1996). Taking the range
of γ − 1 from 0.3 to 0.62 we have derived before and σ0 ∼ 1, the uncertainty in β introduced
by unknown reionization history is of the order of 5%.
   This is a very important conclusion because the slope of column density distribution then
becomes a powerful discriminant of cosmological models through σ0 . It is relatively free of
uncertainties due to reionization history, or the values of Ωb and JH i , unlike the amplitude

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
26     Hui and Gnedin
of the column density distribution. The reader is referred to Hui et al. (1996) for a more
detailed discussion of the predictions of various cosmological models for β.
     The temperature-density relation also has significant implications for the b parameter
distribution. There exists a rather sharp lower cut-off of about b = 20 km s−1 according to
high resolution data of the low column density Lyα observation (Hu et al. 1996). If one
                                                                                     q
naively assumes the observed b is completely a result of thermal broadening b =         2kT /mp ,
one obtains a lower cut-off temperature of about 24000 K. Judging from Fig. 3, it is clear
that at z ∼ 3, which is the relevant redshift for these observations, unless the universe
reionizes quite a bit later than z = 5, all the underdense regions (and including some
overdense regions too, depending on the reionization history) have lower temperature that
this cut-off. This is true even if one allows for a lot of helium photoionization heating or very
little helium recombination cooling by varying the spectrum (see Fig. 8). There are a few
possible resolutions: first, it is possible that the low column density objects that we observe
(column density lower than about 1015 cm2 ) actually correspond to higher densities (δ) ,
but that would imply a very high JH i (higher than about 2.0) which is difficult to reconcile
with observations (see Hui et al. 1996); second, it could be that the universe is not photo-
reionized after all and some other mechanism is at work; third, the observed b parameter
for these low column density systems is not the result of thermal broadening alone. We
consider the last possibility the most likely one. As we have argued in an earlier paper (Hui
et al. 1996) and was pointed out before by numerous authors (see for instance Cen et al.
1994; Hernquist et al. 1996; Miralda-Escudé et al. 1996; Zhang et al. 1995), the observed
absorption profiles do not necessarily conform to the classic Voigt profile but can instead
reflect more the underlying mass density profile and peculiar velocity structure. For instance,
a structure collapsing perpendicular to the line of sight (thus having density enhancement
to induce enhanced absorption) can have an expanding velocity component along the line
of sight, thus creating a profile broader than what naive thermal broadening would predict.
     Finally, let us speculate on how a fluctuating ionizing field might change the results of
our paper. From Fig. 8, it is clear that a fluctuating field with inhomogeneous spectrum can
certainly introduce a lot of scatter to the temperature-density relation, by giving different
photoionization heating and recombination cooling rates even for fluid elements with the
same density evolution. Moreover, the ionizing field can also turn on at different times
for different fluid elements because of radiative transfer effects (Zuo 1992a,b). This would


                                                                    c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
                                                             Equation of State of the IGM        27
introduce additional scatter because as we have seen, the earlier the reionization epoch, the
lower the temperature at a given redshift.
    However, we also learn that the temperature-density relation approaches an asymptotic
limit if one waits long enough. For sufficiently early reionization, neither the amplitude of
JH i nor the reionization history (eg. at what different times radiation turns on at different
elements) affects the temperature very much, assuming JH i is large enough to keep the
universe reionized (see § 3.3). Therefore, provided the amplitude of Jν at the helium ionizing
frequencies does not vary significantly with position at later times z ∼ 2 − 4, the equation
of state we calculate for the early reionization models should be valid, even if the amplitude
of JH i fluctuates at z ∼ 2 − 4. This certainly warrants further research, which we will leave
for future work.
    We are grateful to Prof. Martin Rees for valuable comments and suggestions that consid-
erably improved the manuscript. This work was supported in part by the DOE and by the
NASA (NAGW-2381) at Fermilab and by the UC Berkeley grant 1-443839-07427. Simula-
tions were performed on the NCSA Power Challenge Array under the grant AST-960015N.
N. G. is grateful to Joshua Frieman and the Theoretical Astrophysics group at Fermilab for
hospitality, where part of this work is completed.


APPENDIX A: IONIZATION AND RECOMBINATION RATES

In this section we compile the ionization and recombination rates used in our calculations.
We believe that this compilation is sufficiently up-to-date to reflect all recent improvements.
In some of the equations below the following notation is used:
          (TR)
      T
λj = 2 j         ,
        T
                                   (TR)
where T is the temperature, and Tj        are ionization thresholds for species j = H i, He i, He ii
expressed in temperature units,
   (TR)
 TH i     = 157807 K,
  (TR)
 THe i    = 285335 K,
  (TR)
 THe ii   = 631515 K.
The symbol kB denotes the Boltzmann constant.
    For chemical evolution, we use the symbols RI, CI and DI to denote hydrogen and
helium recombination rates, collisional ionization rates and dielectronic recombination rates.


c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
28     Hui and Gnedin
     For thermal evolution, we use the symbols RC, CC, DC and EC to denote hydrogen
and helium recombination cooling, collisional ionization cooling, dielectronic recombination
cooling and line excitation cooling rates.
     Superscripts and subscripts are added to the above symbols to distinguish between dif-
ferent processes within each class.
     Molecular hydrogen and metal cooling are not expected to be important for the low
density intergalactic medium that we are interested in (see Songaila & Cowie 1996 for a
discussion of metals detected in the Lyα forest).
     Compton cooling rates and the photoionization cross-sections are given at the end.

 case A H ii recombination coefficient: our fit to the data from Ferland et al. (1992); accu-
rate to 2% from 3 K to 109 K:
                                                λ1.503
                                                  Hi
RIHA ii = 1.269 × 10−13 cm3 sec−1
                                    (1.0 + (λH i /0.522)0.470 )1.923
 case A H ii recombination cooling rate: our fit to the data from Ferland et al. (1992); ac-
curate to 2% from 3 K to 109 K:
                                                            λ1.965
                                                              Hi
RCHA ii = 1.778 × 10−29 erg cm3 sec−1 K−1 T
                                                (1.0 + (λH i /0.541)0.502)2.697
 case A He ii recombination coefficient: from from Burgess & Seaton (1960); accurate to
∼10% from 5 × 103 K to 5 × 105 K:
  A
RIHe ii = 3.0 × 10
                   −14
                       cm3 sec−1 λ0.654
                                  He i

 case A He ii recombination cooling rate: from from Burgess & Seaton (1960); accurate to
∼10% from 5 × 103 K to 5 × 105 K:
  A              A
RCHe ii = kB T RIHe ii

 case A He iii recombination coefficient: our fit to the data from Ferland et al. (1992); ac-
curate to 2% from 1 K to 109 K:
  A                                                      λ1.503
                                                           He ii
RIHe iii = 2.0 × 1.269 × 10
                            −13
                                cm3 sec−1
                                            (1.0 + (λHe ii /0.522)0.470)1.923
 case A He iii recombination coefficient: our fit to the data from Ferland et al. (1992); ac-
curate to 2% from 1 K to 109 K:
  A                                                                     λ1.965
                                                                           He ii
RCHe iii = 8 × 1.778 × 10
                          −29
                              erg cm3 dimsec−1 K−1 T
                                                           (1.0 + (λHe ii /0.541)0.502 )2.697
 case B H ii recombination coefficient: our fit to the data from Ferland et al. (1992); accu-
rate to 0.7% from 1 K to 109 K:
                                                                          c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
                                                                       Equation of State of the IGM   29

                                                  λ1.500
                                                    Hi
RIHB ii = 2.753 × 10−14 cm3 sec−1
                                      (1.0 + (λH i /2.740)0.407 )2.242
 case B H ii recombination cooling rate: our fit to the data from Ferland et al. (1992); ac-
curate to 2% from 1 K to 109 K:
                                                                   λ1.970
                                                                     Hi
RCHB ii = 3.435 × 10−30 erg cm3 sec−1 K−1 T
                                                       (1.0 + (λH i /2.250)0.376)3.720
 case B He ii recombination coefficient: from from Burgess & Seaton (1960); accurate to
∼10% from 5 × 103 K to 5 × 105 K:
  B
RIHe ii = 1.26 × 10
                    −14
                        cm3 sec−1 λ0.750
                                   He i


 case B He ii recombination cooling rate: from from Burgess & Seaton (1960); accurate to
∼10% from 5 × 103 K to 5 × 105 K:
  B              B
RCHe ii = kB T RIHe ii

 case B He iii recombination coefficient: our fit to the data from Ferland et al. (1992); ac-
curate to 2% from 3 K to 109 K:
  B                                                          λ1.500
                                                               He ii
RIHe iii = 2.0 × 2.753 × 10
                            −14
                                cm3 sec−1
                                                (1.0 + (λHe ii /2.740)0.407)2.242
 case B He iii recombination cooling rate: our fit to the data from Ferland et al. (1992);
accurate to 2% from 3 K to 109 K:
  B                                                                       λ1.970
                                                                             He ii
RCHe iii = 8 × 3.435 × 10
                          −30
                              erg cm3 sec−1 K−1 T
                                                             (1.0 + (λHe ii /2.250)0.376 )3.720
 H i collisional ionization coefficient: our fit to the data from Lotz (1967); accurate to 3%
from 104 K to 109 K:
                                                        λ−1.089
                  3
CIH i = 21.11 cm sec K T −1   3/2   −3/2
                                           e−λH i /2     Hi
                                             (1 + (λH i /0.354)0.874 )1.101
 H i collisional ionization cooling rate: derived from the collisional ionization coefficient:
              (TR)
CCH i = kB TH i      CIH i

 He i collisional ionization coefficient: our fit to the data from Lotz (1967); accurate to 3%
from 104 K to 109 K:
                                                         λ−1.146
                     3
CIHe i = 32.38 cm sec K T−1   3/2   −3/2
                                           e−λHe i /2      He i
                                              (1 + (λHe i /0.416)0.987 )1.056
 He i collisional ionization cooling rate: derived from the collisional ionization coefficient:
               (TR)
CCHe i = kB THe i CIHe i


c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
30     Hui and Gnedin

Table A1. Photoionization cross-section parameters


 Species      E0 ( eV)        σ0 ( cm2 )           P          ya       yw        y0       y1
   Hi      4.298 × 10−1     5.475 × 10−14        2.963       32.88      0         0       0
  He i      1.361 × 101     9.492 × 10−16        3.188       1.469    2.039    0.4434   2.136
  He ii        1.720        1.369 × 10−14        2.963       32.88      0         0       0


 He ii collisional ionization coefficient: our fit to the data from Lotz (1967); accurate to 3%
from 104 K to 109 K:
                                                          λ−1.089
CIHe ii = 19.95 cm3 sec−1 K3/2 T −3/2 e−λHe ii /2            He ii
                                               (1 + (λHe ii /0.553)0.735 )1.275
 He ii collisional ionization cooling rate: derived from the collisional ionization coefficient:
                   (TR)
CCHe ii = kB THe ii CIHe ii

 He ii dielectronic recombination coefficient: from Aldrovandi & Pequignot (1973); accurate
to ∼5% from 3 × 104 K to 106 K:
                                                                                                                
DIHe ii = 1.90 × 10       −3      3
                               cm sec   −1
                                             K   3/2
                                                       T   −3/2
                                                                  e−0.75λHe iii /2 1 + 0.3e−0.15λHe iii /2

 He ii dielectronic recombination cooling rate: derived from the dielectronic recombination
coefficient:
                          (TR)
DCHe ii = 0.75kB THe iii DIHe iii

 H i line excitation cooling rate: from Black (1981) with the correction from Cen (1992);
accurate to ∼10% from 5 × 103 K to 5 × 105 K:
                                                                               1
ECH i = 7.5 × 10−19 erg cm3 sec−1 e−0.75λH i /2
                                                                       1 + (T /105 K)1/2
 He ii line excitation cooling rate: from Black (1981)with the correction from Cen (1992);
accurate to ∼10% from 5 × 103 K to 5 × 105 K:
                                                                  0.397
                                                           1K                                        1
                                                       
ECHe ii = 5.54 × 10       −17           3
                                 erg cm sec      −1
                                                                           e−0.75λHe ii /2
                                                            T                                1 + (T /105 K)1/2
 Compton heating/cooling term in the equation (2) is given by the following expression
(Peebles 1993), which is exact in the nonrelativistic limit:
dQCompton
          = 6.35 × 10−41 erg cm−3 s−1 K−1 Ωb h2 X̃e (1 + z)7 (2.726 K(1 + z) − T ) .
   dt
     Photoionization cross-sections are taken from Verner et al. (1996) in the following form:
               h                   i    y 0.5P −5.5
σ(E) = σ0 (x − 1)2 + yw2                    q              P ,
                                       1+        y/ya



                                                                                                 c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
                                                                             Equation of State of the IGM           31
                                                q
where x = E/E0 − y0 and y =                          x2 + y12 . Quantities σ0 , E0 , yw , P , ya , y0 , and y1 are
fitting parameters and are given in the Table A. They are accurate to within 10% from the
respective ionization thresholds to 5 keV.


REFERENCES
Aldrovandi, S. M. V., & Pequignot, D. 1973, A&A, 25, 137
Bartelmann, M., & Schneider, P. 1992, A&A, 259, 413
Bertschinger, E., & Jain, B. 1994, ApJ, 431, 486
Bi, H. G., Borner, G., & Chu, Y. 1992, A&A, 266, 1
Bi, H. G., & Davidsen, A. F. 1996, ApJ, in press (astro-ph 9611062)
Black, J. H. 1981, MNRAS, 197, 553
Burgess, A., & Seaton, M. J. 1960, MNRAS, 121, 471
Cen, R. 1992, ApJS, 78, 341
Cen, R. Y., Miralda-Escudé, J., Ostriker, J. P., & Rauch, M. R. 1994, ApJ, 437, L9
Coles, P., Melott, A. L., & Shandarin, S. F. 1993, MNRAS, 260, 765
Couchman, H. M. P., & Rees, M. J. 1986, MNRAS, 221, 53
Cristiani, S., D’Odorico, S., D’Odorico, V., Fontana, A., Giallongo, E., & Savaglio., S. 1996, MNRAS, in press (astro-ph
    9610006)
Croft, R. A. C., Weinberg, D. H., Katz, N., & Hernquist, L. 1996, ApJ, submitted (astro-ph 9611053)
Doroshkevich, A. G. 1970, Astrofizika, 6, 581
Ferland, G. J., Peterson, B. M., Horne, K., Welsh, W. F., & Nahar, S. N. 1992, ApJ, 387, 95
Giroux, M. L., & Shapiro, P. R. 1996, ApJS, 102, 191
Gnedin, N. Y. 1995, ApJS, 97, 231
Gnedin, N. Y., & Bertschinger, E. 1996, ApJ, 470, 115
Gnedin, N. Y., & Hui, L. 1996, ApJ, 472, L73
Gnedin, N. Y., & Ostriker, J. P. 1996, ApJ, submitted (astro-ph 9612127)
Gunn, J. E., & Peterson, B. A. 1965, ApJ, 142, 1633
Haiman, Z., & Loeb, A. 1996, ApJ, submitted (astro-ph 9611028)
Haardt, F., & Madau, P. 1996, ApJ, 461, 20
Hernquist, L., Katz, N., Weinberg, D. H., & Miralda-Escudé, J. 1996, ApJ, 457, L51
Hu, E., Kim, T., Cowie, L. L., & Songalia, A. 1995, AJ, 110, 1526
Hui, L., Gnedin, N. Y., & Zhang, Y. 1996, ApJ, submitted (astro-ph 9608157)
Ikeuchi, S., & Ostriker, J. P. 1986, ApJ, 301, 522
Kofman, L. A., Gnedin, N. Y., & Bahcall, N. A. 1993, ApJ, 413, 1
Lotz, W. 1967, ApJS, 14, 207
Lu, L., Sargent, W. L. W., Womble, D. S., & Takada-Hidai, M. 1996, ApJ, 472, 509
Meiksin, A.,& Madau, P. 1993, ApJ, 412, 34
Miralda-Escudé, J., Cen, R., Ostriker, J. P., & Rauch, M. 1996, ApJ, 471, 582
Miralda-Escudé, J., & Ostriker, J. P. 1992, ApJ, 392, 15
Miralda-Escudé, J., & Rees, M. J. 1994, MNRAS, 266, 343
Ostriker, J. P., & Gnedin, N. Y. 1996, ApJ, 472, L63
Ostriker, J. P., & Steinhardt, P. J. 1995, Nature, 377, 600
Peebles, P. J. E. 1980, The Large Scale Structure of the Universe, Princeton: Princeton University Press


c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
32     Hui and Gnedin
Peebles, P. J. E. 1993, Principles of Physical Cosmology, Princeton: Princeton University Press
Reisenegger, A., & Miralda-Escudé, J. 1995, ApJ, 449, 476
Sciama, D. W., 1990, ApJ, 364, 549
Shapiro, P. R. 1995, ASP Conf. Ser., 80
Shapiro, P. R., Giroux, M. L., & Babul, A. 1994, ApJ, 427, 25
Songaila, A., & Cowie, L. L. 1996, ApJ, 112, 335
Verner, D. A., Ferland, G. J., Korista, K. T., & Yakovlev, D. G. 1996, ApJ, 465, 487
Wadsley, J. W., & Bond, J. R. 1996, preprint astro-ph 9612148, to appear in Proc. 12th Kingston Conference, Halifax
Zel’dovich, Ya. B. 1970, A&A, 5, 84
Zhang, Y., Anninos, P., & Norman, M. L. 1995, ApJ, 453, L57
Zuo, L. 1992a, MNRAS, 258, 36
——— 1992b, MNRAS, 258, 45




                                                                                        c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000
